ebook/CH11/11.0. Graphical User Interfaces.md, before:

# 11.0. Graphical User Interfaces

There are many ways you can create Python applications that can be used by you and other people. The first way we have
learned is scripts that are run in the terminal. There are also web-based applications: using Python as the code that
generates web pages and helps process user interactions with websites (though this is more commonly done with the
JavaScript language). The final way is the way you were perhaps most familiar with before learning python: creating apps
that run in a window on your computer.

The term we use to describe apps that run in a window is a Graphical User Interface, or GUI. GUIs involve something more
than just the normal Python programming language, because they need to interface with the computer's operating system to
generate windows, images, and sounds, and to process input from devices like keyboards, mice, trackpads, and
touchscreens. In most cases, there is a separate programming language that is used to do all of this, but often the more
popular programming languages like Python create a way for you to use that language within the one that you already
know.

There are many different GUI languages. Many of them are specific to single operating systems. But there are a few that
are "cross-platform" and allow you to create windows and graphics, and process input, across different operating
systems. We are going to briefly introduce you to two of them in this course: Tk and PyGame. This week we will focus on
Tk, which specializes in easily creating the kinds of user interfaces you see in productivity apps (windows, buttons,
drop down list boxes, and all that). In a later week we will teach you a little Pygame, which as you can guess by the
name is primarily used to make games, and specializes in generating graphics and other stuff you commonly see in games.

## Tk and Tkinter

Tk was developed as a GUI extension for the Tcl scripting language. It was easy to use and became popular in the 1990s,
and so many other programming languages created an interface for the Tk language so that it could be used in those
languages. In Python, this interface is called Tkinter.

Tkinter has very simple commands for creating a window and changing it's properties (like it's size and color and
border). It then makes use of objects called "widgets", which can be inserted and positioned within a window. Tkinter
provides many kinds of widgets. Some examples are:

- `frame`: a way to organize a window into different sub-areas, and bundle widgets together
- `canvas`: a place where graphics can be drawn
- `menu` and `menubuttons`: creating a menu and its options
- `button`: a simple clickable button with a label, that can initiate code when pressed
- `entry`: a field to enter text

There are many more widgets. We will cover many of them in later sections, and the rest can be read about in the Tkinter
documentation.

Next: [11.1. Tkinter Applications](11.1.%20Tkinter%20Applications.md)<br>
Previous: [10.X. Lab 10]

Commit message:

Update 11.0 Add note about ttkbootstrap

ebook/CH11/11.0. Graphical User Interfaces.md, after:

# 11.0. Graphical User Interfaces

There are many ways you can create Python applications that can be used by you and other people. The first way we have
learned is scripts that are run in the terminal. There are also web-based applications: using Python as the code that
generates web pages and helps process user interactions with websites (though this is more commonly done with the
JavaScript language). The final way is the way you were perhaps most familiar with before learning python: creating apps
that run in a window on your computer.

The term we use to describe apps that run in a window is a Graphical User Interface, or GUI. GUIs involve something more
than just the normal Python programming language, because they need to interface with the computer's operating system to
generate windows, images, and sounds, and to process input from devices like keyboards, mice, trackpads, and
touchscreens. In most cases, there is a separate programming language that is used to do all of this, but often the more
popular programming languages like Python create a way for you to use that language within the one that you already
know.

There are many different GUI languages. Many of them are specific to single operating systems. But there are a few that
are "cross-platform" and allow you to create windows and graphics, and process input, across different operating
systems. We are going to briefly introduce you to two of them in this course: Tk and PyGame. This week we will focus on
Tk, which specializes in easily creating the kinds of user interfaces you see in productivity apps (windows, buttons,
drop down list boxes, and all that). In a later week we will teach you a little Pygame, which as you can guess by the
name is primarily used to make games, and specializes in generating graphics and other stuff you commonly see in games.

## Tk and Tkinter

Tk was developed as a GUI extension for the Tcl scripting language. It was easy to use and became popular in the 1990s,
and so many other programming languages created an interface for the Tk language so that it could be used in those
languages. In Python, this interface is called Tkinter.

Tkinter has very simple commands for creating a window and changing it's properties (like it's size and color and
border). It then makes use of objects called "widgets", which can be inserted and positioned within a window. Tkinter
provides many kinds of widgets. Some examples are:

- `frame`: a way to organize a window into different sub-areas, and bundle widgets together
- `canvas`: a place where graphics can be drawn
- `menu` and `menubuttons`: creating a menu and its options
- `button`: a simple clickable button with a label, that can initiate code when pressed
- `entry`: a field to enter text

There are many more widgets. We will cover many of them in later sections, and the rest can be read about in the Tkinter
documentation.

> [!TIP] Theming GUIs
> There is a library called `ttkbootstrap` that makes it easier to create themed GUIs based on
> Bootstrap (a popular library for theming web pages). This is helpful for two reasons:
>
> - It makes it easier to create GUIs inspired by oft used trends in web design.
> - Unlike Windows, Mac OS's GUI settings do not currently allow you to change the theme of the GUI, so this is a way to customize
>   your application's appearance.
>
> You can learn more about it at https://ttkbootstrap.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Next: [11.1. Tkinter Applications](11.1.%20Tkinter%20Applications.md)<br>
Previous: [10.X. Lab 10]
