bcog_200_syllabus.md, before:

# Syllabus for BCOG 200: Introduction to Programming for the Brain & Cognitive Sciences

## 1. Course Info

### Term

Spring 2025

### Class Location & Time

Psychology Room 32<br>
Tue/Thu 9:30am-10:50am

Zoom link when strictly necessary (e.g., instructor is sick):
[https://illinois.zoom.us/j/87583213959?pwd=1yGjG6Yty3SJiaLj0A4wDhG3Ab0mJ3.1](https://illinois.zoom.us/j/87583213959?pwd=1yGjG6Yty3SJiaLj0A4wDhG3Ab0mJ3.1)

### Materials

1. Course Website: https://canvas.illinois.edu
2. [Online Textbook](ebook/book_contents.md)
3. Course Github Page: https://github.com/stefanuddenberg/python_for_bcs

### Instructor

Dr. Stefan Uddenberg\
Assistant Professor of Psychology\
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign\
E-mail: stefanu@illinois.edu \
Website: https://www.socialperception.org \
Office Hours: Friday 3:40pm-5:40pm, Psychology 29

### Teaching Assistants

- Pei-Ling Yang

  - Ph.D. Student in Psychology, Attention & Perception area
  - University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
  - E-mail: plyang2@illinois.edu
  - Office Hours: Thursdays 2pm-4pm, Psychology 590

- Jonathan Yuquimpo
  - Ph.D. Student in Psychology, Cognitive area
  - University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
  - E-mail: jy57@illinois.edu
  - Office Hours: Thursdays 4pm-6pm, Psychology 830

### Attribution

This course is based on the original [BCOG 200 taught by Jon Willits](https://github.com/jonwillits/python_for_bcs/),
and its most recent iteration taught by [Jaime Derringer](https://www.jaime.phd/).

## 2. Course Description and Learning Objectives

Programming for Cognitive Science has three primary learning objectives:

- to learn what computer programming is and what one can accomplish using computer programs
- to master the basics of how to write computer programs in the Python programming language, including its syntax and proper
  programming technique and style
- to discuss how computer programs, models, and simulations contribute to research about brain and cognitive science.

## 3. Course Requirements and Grading

### Grading Scale

- A: 90 and above
- B: 80-89.999
- C: 70-79.999
- D: 60-69.999
- F: Below 60
  <br>+/- grades are not given in this class.

### Grade Components

- Labs: 40%
- Homework: 30%
- Final Project: 20%
- Participation and Attendance: 10%
- Bonus Points for Final Project: up to 2% plus possible extension (individual action)
- Bonus Points for Course Feedback: up to 2% (collective action)

I am aware that the above numbers add up to 104%; the bonus points are explained in greater detail below.

### Labs — 40%

Each week we will be spending a considerable portion of our lab time working on various lab exercises. Each lab
assignment is one of the final sections of each chapter in the textbook. Lab assignments should be turned in each week
on the course website. Labs are due each Monday at 11:59pm. They can be turned in by Tuesday at 11:59pm for a 20% deduction.
After Tuesday at 11:59pm, they will not be accepted unless you have made prior arrangements.

### Homework — 30%

There are four homework assignments throughout the semester, about every three weeks. The homework assignments involve
creating a single, more complex Python program that achieves some BCOG-related goals. Homework assignments should be
turned in each week on the course website. These homework assignments are due on Wednesdays at 11:59pm, and 10% is
deducted for each day they are late.

### Final Project — 20%

The final project will involve creating a Python program that is more complex, like the homework assignments, but on a
topic of your own choosing. We will discuss the details later. At the end of the semester, you will turn in your code
and a brief project report which describes your project. For the project, you may work alone or in a group. The bigger
the group, the higher the expectations for your project.

You can learn more about the final project [here](bcog_200_final_project_assignment.md).

### Participation and Attendance — 10%

Participation and attendance is 10% of your grade. This includes being present for lab, participating in discussions,
and coming to office hours.

### Bonus Points for Final Project — up to 2% (plus possible extension)

You will have two opportunities to earn bonus points for your final projects, both related to peer review. You will
receive 1 point of extra credit for submitting the project early in order to solicit peer feedback. Additionally, you
will receive 1 more point of extra credit if you provide peer feedback to at least two other randomly selected projects
from the class. Lastly, anyone who completes _both_ of these tasks will receive an automatic extension of the final
project due date until May 19th.

### Bonus Points for Course Feedback — up to 2%

I will solicit anonymous, honest feedback from you throughout the semester, both formally and informally. In order to
incentivize your participation, I am offering a collective reward for the class — an additional 2% toward _all_ of your
final grades — under one condition. **I will distribute this bonus to the whole class if, and only if, at least 75% of
the class submits feedback for the course.** If less than 75% of the class participates, then no one receives any bonus
(so submitting feedback can only help you, and can never hurt you). It is important to me that you are honest in this
feedback. This bonus is a class-wide incentive to help develop the course, its content, my own abilities as an
instructor, and to generally improve the course for everyone, including future students.

## 4. Academic Integrity Policy

This class will take the University's Academic Integrity policy very seriously. Cheating and other forms of academic
dishonesty will not be tolerated. The University of Illinois has the responsibility of maintaining academic integrity so
as to protect the quality of education and research on our campus and to protect those who depend upon our integrity. It
is the responsibility of each student to refrain from infractions of academic integrity, from conduct that may lead to
suspicion of such infractions, and from conduct that aids others in such infractions. It is also the responsibility of
the student to know and understand what constitutes academic integrity infractions. Ignorance is not a valid excuse. The
University's official statement of a student's responsibilities can be found here:
[https://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1/part4/1-401](https://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1/part4/1-401).
More information about the University's academic integrity policy, and what constitutes an infraction, can be found
here: [https://www.las.illinois.edu/students/integrity/](https://www.las.illinois.edu/students/integrity/).

### AI Policy

It is becoming increasingly common for programmers to use AI tools to help them write code. This is not so dangerous for
an experienced coder who (hopefully) understands both the benefits and dangers of these tools. However, it is likely
outright harmful for a beginner who is just learning how to program. Imagine trying to learn how to ride a bicycle for
the first time, but instead of struggling with an actual bicycle, falling, getting bruised, developing a sense of
balance, etc., you're instead "training" by sitting on a self-driving tricycle with unreliable GPS and a tendency to go
off-road. I am especially concerned by how these tools can reduce one's ability to debug program behavior and think
critically about whether the code you are writing accomplishes your goals correctly.

While I don't want to discourage you from using AI assistants writ large, I do want you to be transparent and thoughtful
in your use of such tools. So, I ask that you keep in mind the distinction between "learning" vs. "doing" as you go
through this course:

- You may use AI tools to help you _learn_ how to program. For example, you can ask large language models (LLMs, like
  ChatGPT) to explain core coding concepts to you in ways that you might find digestible, or to help you understand why
  your code threw a particular error. One such tool is Harvard's CS50 class's [Rubber Duck Debugging
  AI](https://cs50.ai/chat). The virtual duck asks questions to help you understand what's going on in your code (a la
  ["Rubber Duck Debugging"](https://rubberduckdebugging.com/)). It is unlikely to hamper your learning and may even
  help.
- You may _not_ use AI tools to _do_ (or complete) any of your assignments. This means that you mustn't ask a chatbot to
  write code for you (e.g., "Write me a function that returns the sum of squares of a list of numbers") and you mustn't
  copy and paste code directly from a large language model or other AI system into an assignment as your own.

**Transparency requirement**: If you do use AI tools to help you learn, I ask that you please be transparent about it. For example, if you use a
chatbot to help you understand a concept, you might write at the top of your code something like:

> I used ChatGPT to help me understand recursion. Here is the conversation that I had:
> [Insert link to conversation or summary of conversation here]

If, however, you fail to be transparent in your use of the tools, or use an AI tool to literally _do_ your assignments
for you, then you will have violated the academic integrity policy. Such violations will result in a grade of zero for
the relevant assignment and may be referred to the University's academic integrity office for further review.

## 5. Accommodation Policy

To obtain disability-related academic adjustments and/or auxiliary aids, students with disabilities must contact the
course instructor and the Disability Resources and Educational Services (DRES) as soon as possible. To contact DRES, you
may visit 1207 S. Oak St., Champaign, call 333-4603, e-mail disability@illinois.edu, or go to the DRES website
([https://www.disability.illinois.edu](https://www.disability.illinois.edu)). If you are concerned you have a
disability-related condition that is impacting your academic progress, there are academic screening appointments
available on campus that can help diagnose a previously undiagnosed disability by visiting the DRES website and
selecting "Sign-Up for an Academic Screening" at the bottom of the page.

## 6. External Resources

Here I will keep a running list of useful resources for learning Python and related programming skills (e.g.,
the terminal, Git) that can supplement the class material and office hours.

- [Trinket](https://trinket.io) is a useful in-browser Python runnner, especially for Turtle programs
  - It has several [tutorials](https://hourofpython.com/) available which may prove helpful!
- [DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com/) is an online platform offering interactive coding tutorials in many different
  programming languages, including Python. Some lessons are free, but many require a subscription.
- Here at Illinois, Grainger offers [Python tutoring](https://care.grainger.illinois.edu/tutoring/schedule-by-skill)
- [Video overview of Github Desktop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dd7KRpKeaE)
- [Hutch Data Science Intro to Git](https://hutchdatascience.org/Intro_to_Git_and_GitHub/introduction-to-git.html)

## 7. Class Schedule

### Week 1 — "Hello, World!" Starting your Python journey.

Dates: Jan 21 & Jan 23

Topics:

- Installing and Using Python
- Variables and Data Types
- Operators and Conditionals

Assignments:

- [CH0: Installing and Using Python](ebook/CH00/0.0.%20Installing%20Python.md)
- 0.3 Supplement: [Glossary of common terminal commands from Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/article/command-line-commands)
- [CH1: Basic Python Commands](ebook/CH01/1.0.%20Python%20Statements%20&%20Expressions.md)
- [Lab 1](ebook/CH01/1.8.%20Lab%201.md) (due Jan 27 by 5pm)

### Week 2 — Learning to loop, live: Making the machine repeat **your**self, so you don't have to

Dates: Jan 28 & Jan 30

Topics:

- For and While Loops
- Lists and Tuples
- Input and Output

Assignments:

- [CH2: Loops, Sequences, and IO](ebook/CH02/2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)
- [Lab 2](ebook/CH02/2.10.%20Lab%202.md) (due Feb 3 by 5pm)

### Week 3 — Abstract patterns solve concrete problems: Functions as everyday problem-solving tools

Dates: Feb 4 & Feb 6

Topics:

- Functions
- Local and Global Variables
- An Example Program

Assignments:

- [CH3: Functions](ebook/CH03/3.0.%20Functions.md)
- [Lab 3](ebook/CH03/3.6.%20Lab%203.md) (due Feb 10 by 5pm)
- [Homework 1](ebook/CH03/3.7.%20Homework%203.md) (due Feb 10 by 5pm)

### Week 4 — Staying organized so your data can spark joy: Data structures and sequencing

Dates: Feb 11 & Feb 13

Topics:

- Dictionaries and Sets
- Sequencing
- JSON Files

Assignments:

- [CH4: Dictionaries and Sets](ebook/CH04/4.0.%20Sets.md)
- [Lab 4](ebook/CH04/4.4.%20Lab%204.md) (due Feb 17 by 5pm)

### Week 5 — Want to fly? Just `import antigravity`: Building on the backs of giants with core and third-party modules

Dates: Feb 18 & Feb 20

Topics:

- Core Python Modules
- Installing Add On Modules
- NumPy

Assignments:

- [CH5: Modules (especially NumPy)](ebook/CH05/5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)
- [Lab 5](ebook/CH05/5.5.%20Lab%205.md) (due Feb 24 by 5pm)

### Week 6 — In a `Class` of its own: Working with objects to solve complex problems

Dates: Feb 25 & Feb 27

Topics:

- Classes and Object-Oriented Programming
- Class Inheritance
- Turtle Graphics

Assignments:

- [CH6: Classes and OOP](ebook/CH06/)
- [Lab 6](ebook/CH06/6.5.%20Lab%206.md) (due Mar 3 by 5pm)
- [Homework 2](ebook/CH06/6.6.%20Homework%206.md) (due Mar 3 by 5pm)

### Week 7 — "Make it work, make it right, make it fast": Best practices and version control

Dates: Mar 4 & Mar 6

Topics:

- Good Programming Techniques
- Using GitHub
- Using Markdown

Assignments:

- [CH8: Good Programming Techniques](ebook/CH08/8.0.%20Good%20Programming%20Techniques.md)
- [Version Control (Git)](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/version-control/) from MIT's "The Missing Semester of Your CS Education"
  - Just the reading here; everything else at this link is optional
- [Hutch Data Science Intro to Git](https://hutchdatascience.org/Intro_to_Git_and_GitHub/introduction-to-git.html)
- [Video overview of Git, Github, and Github Desktop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dd7KRpKeaE)
- [Guide to Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/getting-started/)
  - [Markdown Cheatsheet](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/)
  - [Interactive Markdown tutorial](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/)
- Project Check-in 1 (due Mar 10 by 5pm)

### Week 8 — 🎵 Buttons and boxes and sliders in action: Graphics for users and their satisfaction 🎵

Dates: Mar 11 & Mar 13

Topics:

- Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)
- Tkinter

Assignments:

- [CH11: Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)](ebook/CH11/)
- [Lab 11](ebook/CH11/11.6.%20Lab%2011.md) (due Mar 17 by 11:59pm)

### Spring Break Mar 15-23

### Week 9 — From idea to implementation: Building an experiment from scratch

Dates: Mar 25 & Mar 27

Topics:

- Setting Up A Project
- Creating Experiments

Assignments:

- [CH13: Programming Experiments](ebook/CH13/)
- [Lab 13](ebook/CH13/13.6.%20Lab%2013.md) (due Mar 31 by 11:59pm)

### Week 10 — Data so good you can almost frame it: Analysis with Pandas

Dates: Apr 1 & Apr 3

Topics:

- Data Analysis
- Pandas and Dataframes

Assignments:

- [CH14: Data Science](ebook/CH14/)
- Project Check-in 2 (due Apr 7 by 11:59pm)

### Week 11 — Show, don't tell: Storytelling via data visualizations

Dates: Apr 8 & Apr 10

Topics:

- Data Visualization
- Line Plots, Scatterplots, Histograms, and Bar Plots
- Multiple Plots on the Same Figure

Assignments:

- [CH15: Data Visualization](ebook/CH15/)
- [Lab 15](ebook/CH15/15.5.%20Lab%2015.md) (due Apr 14 by 11:59pm)
- [Homework 3](ebook/CH15/15.6.%20Homework%2015.md) (due Apr 16 by 11:59pm)

### Week 12 — Progressing projects and projecting progress

Dates: Apr 15 & Apr 17

Topics:

- Project Workdays

Assignments:

- Project Check-in 3 (due Apr 21 by 11:59pm)

### Week 13 — Teaching sand to think: Revealing patterns in data with machine learning

Dates: Apr 22 & Apr 24

Topics:

- Machine Learning
- Regression
- Classification
- Clustering

Assignments:

- [CH17: Machine Learning](ebook/CH17/)
- [Lab 17](ebook/CH17/17.6.%20Lab%2017.md) (due Apr 28 by 11:59pm)

### Week 14 — "Speak friend, and enter": Taming text with regular expressions and NLP

Dates: Apr 29 & May 1

Topics:

- Regular Expressions
- Natural Language Processing

Assignments:

- [CH18: Natural Language Processing](ebook/CH18/)
- [Lab 18](ebook/CH18/18.5.%20Lab%2018.md) (due May 5 by 11:59pm)
- [Homework 4](ebook/CH18/18.6.%20Homework%2018.md) (due May 7 by 11:59pm)

### Week 15 — It's the final countdown!

Dates: May 6

Topics:

- Final Project Workday

Assignments:

- Final Project Extra Credit 1: Get peer reviewed (due May 9 by 11:59pm)
- Final Project Extra Credit 2: Provide peer review (due May 12 by 11:59pm)

### Final Exam Week — There and back again

Assignments:

- Final Project (due May 16 by 11:59pm, or May 19 by 11:59pm if you have completed the extra credit tasks)

Commit message:

Add external resource on regular expressions

bcog_200_syllabus.md, after:

# Syllabus for BCOG 200: Introduction to Programming for the Brain & Cognitive Sciences

## 1. Course Info

### Term

Spring 2025

### Class Location & Time

Psychology Room 32<br>
Tue/Thu 9:30am-10:50am

Zoom link when strictly necessary (e.g., instructor is sick):
[https://illinois.zoom.us/j/87583213959?pwd=1yGjG6Yty3SJiaLj0A4wDhG3Ab0mJ3.1](https://illinois.zoom.us/j/87583213959?pwd=1yGjG6Yty3SJiaLj0A4wDhG3Ab0mJ3.1)

### Materials

1. Course Website: https://canvas.illinois.edu
2. [Online Textbook](ebook/book_contents.md)
3. Course Github Page: https://github.com/stefanuddenberg/python_for_bcs

### Instructor

Dr. Stefan Uddenberg\
Assistant Professor of Psychology\
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign\
E-mail: stefanu@illinois.edu \
Website: https://www.socialperception.org \
Office Hours: Friday 3:40pm-5:40pm, Psychology 29

### Teaching Assistants

- Pei-Ling Yang

  - Ph.D. Student in Psychology, Attention & Perception area
  - University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
  - E-mail: plyang2@illinois.edu
  - Office Hours: Thursdays 2pm-4pm, Psychology 590

- Jonathan Yuquimpo
  - Ph.D. Student in Psychology, Cognitive area
  - University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
  - E-mail: jy57@illinois.edu
  - Office Hours: Thursdays 4pm-6pm, Psychology 830

### Attribution

This course is based on the original [BCOG 200 taught by Jon Willits](https://github.com/jonwillits/python_for_bcs/),
and its most recent iteration taught by [Jaime Derringer](https://www.jaime.phd/).

## 2. Course Description and Learning Objectives

Programming for Cognitive Science has three primary learning objectives:

- to learn what computer programming is and what one can accomplish using computer programs
- to master the basics of how to write computer programs in the Python programming language, including its syntax and proper
  programming technique and style
- to discuss how computer programs, models, and simulations contribute to research about brain and cognitive science.

## 3. Course Requirements and Grading

### Grading Scale

- A: 90 and above
- B: 80-89.999
- C: 70-79.999
- D: 60-69.999
- F: Below 60
  <br>+/- grades are not given in this class.

### Grade Components

- Labs: 40%
- Homework: 30%
- Final Project: 20%
- Participation and Attendance: 10%
- Bonus Points for Final Project: up to 2% plus possible extension (individual action)
- Bonus Points for Course Feedback: up to 2% (collective action)

I am aware that the above numbers add up to 104%; the bonus points are explained in greater detail below.

### Labs — 40%

Each week we will be spending a considerable portion of our lab time working on various lab exercises. Each lab
assignment is one of the final sections of each chapter in the textbook. Lab assignments should be turned in each week
on the course website. Labs are due each Monday at 11:59pm. They can be turned in by Tuesday at 11:59pm for a 20% deduction.
After Tuesday at 11:59pm, they will not be accepted unless you have made prior arrangements.

### Homework — 30%

There are four homework assignments throughout the semester, about every three weeks. The homework assignments involve
creating a single, more complex Python program that achieves some BCOG-related goals. Homework assignments should be
turned in each week on the course website. These homework assignments are due on Wednesdays at 11:59pm, and 10% is
deducted for each day they are late.

### Final Project — 20%

The final project will involve creating a Python program that is more complex, like the homework assignments, but on a
topic of your own choosing. We will discuss the details later. At the end of the semester, you will turn in your code
and a brief project report which describes your project. For the project, you may work alone or in a group. The bigger
the group, the higher the expectations for your project.

You can learn more about the final project [here](bcog_200_final_project_assignment.md).

### Participation and Attendance — 10%

Participation and attendance is 10% of your grade. This includes being present for lab, participating in discussions,
and coming to office hours.

### Bonus Points for Final Project — up to 2% (plus possible extension)

You will have two opportunities to earn bonus points for your final projects, both related to peer review. You will
receive 1 point of extra credit for submitting the project early in order to solicit peer feedback. Additionally, you
will receive 1 more point of extra credit if you provide peer feedback to at least two other randomly selected projects
from the class. Lastly, anyone who completes _both_ of these tasks will receive an automatic extension of the final
project due date until May 19th.

### Bonus Points for Course Feedback — up to 2%

I will solicit anonymous, honest feedback from you throughout the semester, both formally and informally. In order to
incentivize your participation, I am offering a collective reward for the class — an additional 2% toward _all_ of your
final grades — under one condition. **I will distribute this bonus to the whole class if, and only if, at least 75% of
the class submits feedback for the course.** If less than 75% of the class participates, then no one receives any bonus
(so submitting feedback can only help you, and can never hurt you). It is important to me that you are honest in this
feedback. This bonus is a class-wide incentive to help develop the course, its content, my own abilities as an
instructor, and to generally improve the course for everyone, including future students.

## 4. Academic Integrity Policy

This class will take the University's Academic Integrity policy very seriously. Cheating and other forms of academic
dishonesty will not be tolerated. The University of Illinois has the responsibility of maintaining academic integrity so
as to protect the quality of education and research on our campus and to protect those who depend upon our integrity. It
is the responsibility of each student to refrain from infractions of academic integrity, from conduct that may lead to
suspicion of such infractions, and from conduct that aids others in such infractions. It is also the responsibility of
the student to know and understand what constitutes academic integrity infractions. Ignorance is not a valid excuse. The
University's official statement of a student's responsibilities can be found here:
[https://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1/part4/1-401](https://studentcode.illinois.edu/article1/part4/1-401).
More information about the University's academic integrity policy, and what constitutes an infraction, can be found
here: [https://www.las.illinois.edu/students/integrity/](https://www.las.illinois.edu/students/integrity/).

### AI Policy

It is becoming increasingly common for programmers to use AI tools to help them write code. This is not so dangerous for
an experienced coder who (hopefully) understands both the benefits and dangers of these tools. However, it is likely
outright harmful for a beginner who is just learning how to program. Imagine trying to learn how to ride a bicycle for
the first time, but instead of struggling with an actual bicycle, falling, getting bruised, developing a sense of
balance, etc., you're instead "training" by sitting on a self-driving tricycle with unreliable GPS and a tendency to go
off-road. I am especially concerned by how these tools can reduce one's ability to debug program behavior and think
critically about whether the code you are writing accomplishes your goals correctly.

While I don't want to discourage you from using AI assistants writ large, I do want you to be transparent and thoughtful
in your use of such tools. So, I ask that you keep in mind the distinction between "learning" vs. "doing" as you go
through this course:

- You may use AI tools to help you _learn_ how to program. For example, you can ask large language models (LLMs, like
  ChatGPT) to explain core coding concepts to you in ways that you might find digestible, or to help you understand why
  your code threw a particular error. One such tool is Harvard's CS50 class's [Rubber Duck Debugging
  AI](https://cs50.ai/chat). The virtual duck asks questions to help you understand what's going on in your code (a la
  ["Rubber Duck Debugging"](https://rubberduckdebugging.com/)). It is unlikely to hamper your learning and may even
  help.
- You may _not_ use AI tools to _do_ (or complete) any of your assignments. This means that you mustn't ask a chatbot to
  write code for you (e.g., "Write me a function that returns the sum of squares of a list of numbers") and you mustn't
  copy and paste code directly from a large language model or other AI system into an assignment as your own.

**Transparency requirement**: If you do use AI tools to help you learn, I ask that you please be transparent about it. For example, if you use a
chatbot to help you understand a concept, you might write at the top of your code something like:

> I used ChatGPT to help me understand recursion. Here is the conversation that I had:
> [Insert link to conversation or summary of conversation here]

If, however, you fail to be transparent in your use of the tools, or use an AI tool to literally _do_ your assignments
for you, then you will have violated the academic integrity policy. Such violations will result in a grade of zero for
the relevant assignment and may be referred to the University's academic integrity office for further review.

## 5. Accommodation Policy

To obtain disability-related academic adjustments and/or auxiliary aids, students with disabilities must contact the
course instructor and the Disability Resources and Educational Services (DRES) as soon as possible. To contact DRES, you
may visit 1207 S. Oak St., Champaign, call 333-4603, e-mail disability@illinois.edu, or go to the DRES website
([https://www.disability.illinois.edu](https://www.disability.illinois.edu)). If you are concerned you have a
disability-related condition that is impacting your academic progress, there are academic screening appointments
available on campus that can help diagnose a previously undiagnosed disability by visiting the DRES website and
selecting "Sign-Up for an Academic Screening" at the bottom of the page.

## 6. External Resources

Here I will keep a running list of useful resources for learning Python and related programming skills (e.g.,
the terminal, Git) that can supplement the class material and office hours.

- [Trinket](https://trinket.io) is a useful in-browser Python runnner, especially for Turtle programs
  - It has several [tutorials](https://hourofpython.com/) available which may prove helpful!
- [DataCamp](https://www.datacamp.com/) is an online platform offering interactive coding tutorials in many different
  programming languages, including Python. Some lessons are free, but many require a subscription.
- Here at Illinois, Grainger offers [Python tutoring](https://care.grainger.illinois.edu/tutoring/schedule-by-skill)
- [Video overview of Github Desktop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dd7KRpKeaE)
- [Hutch Data Science Intro to Git](https://hutchdatascience.org/Intro_to_Git_and_GitHub/introduction-to-git.html)
- [Regex One](https://regexone.com/) is an interactive tool for learning about regular expressions.

## 7. Class Schedule

### Week 1 — "Hello, World!" Starting your Python journey.

Dates: Jan 21 & Jan 23

Topics:

- Installing and Using Python
- Variables and Data Types
- Operators and Conditionals

Assignments:

- [CH0: Installing and Using Python](ebook/CH00/0.0.%20Installing%20Python.md)
- 0.3 Supplement: [Glossary of common terminal commands from Codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/article/command-line-commands)
- [CH1: Basic Python Commands](ebook/CH01/1.0.%20Python%20Statements%20&%20Expressions.md)
- [Lab 1](ebook/CH01/1.8.%20Lab%201.md) (due Jan 27 by 5pm)

### Week 2 — Learning to loop, live: Making the machine repeat **your**self, so you don't have to

Dates: Jan 28 & Jan 30

Topics:

- For and While Loops
- Lists and Tuples
- Input and Output

Assignments:

- [CH2: Loops, Sequences, and IO](ebook/CH02/2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)
- [Lab 2](ebook/CH02/2.10.%20Lab%202.md) (due Feb 3 by 5pm)

### Week 3 — Abstract patterns solve concrete problems: Functions as everyday problem-solving tools

Dates: Feb 4 & Feb 6

Topics:

- Functions
- Local and Global Variables
- An Example Program

Assignments:

- [CH3: Functions](ebook/CH03/3.0.%20Functions.md)
- [Lab 3](ebook/CH03/3.6.%20Lab%203.md) (due Feb 10 by 5pm)
- [Homework 1](ebook/CH03/3.7.%20Homework%203.md) (due Feb 10 by 5pm)

### Week 4 — Staying organized so your data can spark joy: Data structures and sequencing

Dates: Feb 11 & Feb 13

Topics:

- Dictionaries and Sets
- Sequencing
- JSON Files

Assignments:

- [CH4: Dictionaries and Sets](ebook/CH04/4.0.%20Sets.md)
- [Lab 4](ebook/CH04/4.4.%20Lab%204.md) (due Feb 17 by 5pm)

### Week 5 — Want to fly? Just `import antigravity`: Building on the backs of giants with core and third-party modules

Dates: Feb 18 & Feb 20

Topics:

- Core Python Modules
- Installing Add On Modules
- NumPy

Assignments:

- [CH5: Modules (especially NumPy)](ebook/CH05/5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)
- [Lab 5](ebook/CH05/5.5.%20Lab%205.md) (due Feb 24 by 5pm)

### Week 6 — In a `Class` of its own: Working with objects to solve complex problems

Dates: Feb 25 & Feb 27

Topics:

- Classes and Object-Oriented Programming
- Class Inheritance
- Turtle Graphics

Assignments:

- [CH6: Classes and OOP](ebook/CH06/)
- [Lab 6](ebook/CH06/6.5.%20Lab%206.md) (due Mar 3 by 5pm)
- [Homework 2](ebook/CH06/6.6.%20Homework%206.md) (due Mar 3 by 5pm)

### Week 7 — "Make it work, make it right, make it fast": Best practices and version control

Dates: Mar 4 & Mar 6

Topics:

- Good Programming Techniques
- Using GitHub
- Using Markdown

Assignments:

- [CH8: Good Programming Techniques](ebook/CH08/8.0.%20Good%20Programming%20Techniques.md)
- [Version Control (Git)](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/2020/version-control/) from MIT's "The Missing Semester of Your CS Education"
  - Just the reading here; everything else at this link is optional
- [Hutch Data Science Intro to Git](https://hutchdatascience.org/Intro_to_Git_and_GitHub/introduction-to-git.html)
- [Video overview of Git, Github, and Github Desktop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dd7KRpKeaE)
- [Guide to Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/getting-started/)
  - [Markdown Cheatsheet](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/)
  - [Interactive Markdown tutorial](https://www.markdowntutorial.com/)
- Project Check-in 1 (due Mar 10 by 5pm)

### Week 8 — 🎵 Buttons and boxes and sliders in action: Graphics for users and their satisfaction 🎵

Dates: Mar 11 & Mar 13

Topics:

- Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)
- Tkinter

Assignments:

- [CH11: Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)](ebook/CH11/)
- [Lab 11](ebook/CH11/11.6.%20Lab%2011.md) (due Mar 17 by 11:59pm)

### Spring Break Mar 15-23

### Week 9 — From idea to implementation: Building an experiment from scratch

Dates: Mar 25 & Mar 27

Topics:

- Setting Up A Project
- Creating Experiments

Assignments:

- [CH13: Programming Experiments](ebook/CH13/)
- [Lab 13](ebook/CH13/13.6.%20Lab%2013.md) (due Mar 31 by 11:59pm)

### Week 10 — Data so good you can almost frame it: Analysis with Pandas

Dates: Apr 1 & Apr 3

Topics:

- Data Analysis
- Pandas and Dataframes

Assignments:

- [CH14: Data Science](ebook/CH14/)
- Project Check-in 2 (due Apr 7 by 11:59pm)

### Week 11 — Show, don't tell: Storytelling via data visualizations

Dates: Apr 8 & Apr 10

Topics:

- Data Visualization
- Line Plots, Scatterplots, Histograms, and Bar Plots
- Multiple Plots on the Same Figure

Assignments:

- [CH15: Data Visualization](ebook/CH15/)
- [Lab 15](ebook/CH15/15.5.%20Lab%2015.md) (due Apr 14 by 11:59pm)
- [Homework 3](ebook/CH15/15.6.%20Homework%2015.md) (due Apr 16 by 11:59pm)

### Week 12 — Progressing projects and projecting progress

Dates: Apr 15 & Apr 17

Topics:

- Project Workdays

Assignments:

- Project Check-in 3 (due Apr 21 by 11:59pm)

### Week 13 — Teaching sand to think: Revealing patterns in data with machine learning

Dates: Apr 22 & Apr 24

Topics:

- Machine Learning
- Regression
- Classification
- Clustering

Assignments:

- [CH17: Machine Learning](ebook/CH17/)
- [Lab 17](ebook/CH17/17.6.%20Lab%2017.md) (due Apr 28 by 11:59pm)

### Week 14 — "Speak friend, and enter": Taming text with regular expressions and NLP

Dates: Apr 29 & May 1

Topics:

- Regular Expressions
- Natural Language Processing

Assignments:

- [CH18: Natural Language Processing](ebook/CH18/)
- [Lab 18](ebook/CH18/18.5.%20Lab%2018.md) (due May 5 by 11:59pm)
- [Homework 4](ebook/CH18/18.6.%20Homework%2018.md) (due May 7 by 11:59pm)

### Week 15 — It's the final countdown!

Dates: May 6

Topics:

- Final Project Workday

Assignments:

- Final Project Extra Credit 1: Get peer reviewed (due May 9 by 11:59pm)
- Final Project Extra Credit 2: Provide peer review (due May 12 by 11:59pm)

### Final Exam Week — There and back again

Assignments:

- Final Project (due May 16 by 11:59pm, or May 19 by 11:59pm if you have completed the extra credit tasks)
