ebook/CH01/1.0. Python Statements & Expressions.md, before:

# 1.0 Python Statements and Expressions

Python is a language that consists of **statements** and **expressions**.

A **statement** is how we refer to any line of code that Python can execute. Here are some examples.

```python
x = 5
if x > 10:
    print("x is greater than 10")
else:
    print("x is not greater than 10")
```

An **expression** is a piece of code that evaluates to a value. Below I've included some examples of
expressions and statements, with their descriptions written in comments next to them.

```python
2 + 3 # Expression, evaluates to 5
a = [1, 2, 3] # Assignment statement, not an expression
[i*2 for i in a] # List comprehension, an expression that evaluates to [2, 4, 6]
b = [i*2 for i in a] # Assignment statement that assigns b to the value of that expression
x = 5 # Assignment statement, not an expression
y = 'dog' # Assignment statement, not an expression
z = x * y # Assignment statement that assigns z to the value of the expression: x * y
q = 5 % 2 # Assignment statement that assigns q to the value of the expression: 5 % 2 (which is 1)
len(a) # Function call expression (this one evaluates to 3)
print("hello world") # Function call expression (this one evaluates to None)
```

A quick way to differentiate between expressions and statements is to remember that expressions have
values, while statements are complete instructions. In short:

- An **expression** is code that evaluates to a value. 
  - You can use `eval()` to evaluate an expression (written as a string) to a value (but not
    `exec()`). E.g., `eval("2 + 1")` evaluates to 3.
- A **statement** is an instruction that does not evaluate to a value.
  - You can use `exec()` to execute a statement (written as a string) (but not `eval()`). E.g.,
    `exec("x = 3 + 5")` executes the statement `x = 3 + 5`, assigning `x` to have the value of `8`,
    but does not return a value.
  - Some expressions can appear as a statement when written on a line by themselves (this is called
    an *expression statement*), such as `len(x)` or `print("hello world")`.


## Exercise: Statements and Expressions

### Part A (expressions)

What will each of the following **expressions** evaluate to?

```python
3 + 3
5 * 2
10 / 2
5 ** 2
```

### Part B (statements)

Now consider these **statements**. After running them, what are the final values of `x`, `y`, and `z`?

```python
x = 10 % 3
y = x * 4
z = y * x
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready</summary>

```python
3 + 3  # 6
5 * 2  # 10
10 / 2  # 5
5 ** 2  # 25
```

```python
x = 10 % 3  # 1
y = x * 4  # 4
z = y * x  # 4
```

</details>

Next: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)<br>
Previous: [0.8. Other Useful Tips](../CH00/0.8.%20Other%20Useful%20Tips.md)

Commit message:

Update 1.0 with exhortation to run the code in their own editor/python terminal.

ebook/CH01/1.0. Python Statements & Expressions.md, after:

# 1.0 Python Statements and Expressions

Python is a language that consists of **statements** and **expressions**.

A **statement** is how we refer to any line of code that Python can execute. Here are some examples.

```python
x = 5
if x > 10:
    print("x is greater than 10")
else:
    print("x is not greater than 10")
```

An **expression** is a piece of code that evaluates to a value. Below I've included some examples of
expressions and statements, with their descriptions written in comments next to them.

```python
2 + 3 # Expression, evaluates to 5
a = [1, 2, 3] # Assignment statement, not an expression
[i * 2 for i in a] # List comprehension, an expression that evaluates to [2, 4, 6]
b = [i * 2 for i in a] # Assignment statement that assigns b to the value of that expression
x = 5 # Assignment statement, not an expression
y = "dog" # Assignment statement, not an expression
z = x * y # Assignment statement that assigns z to the value of the expression: x * y
q = 5 % 2 # Assignment statement that assigns q to the value of the expression: 5 % 2 (which is 1)
len(a) # Function call expression (this one evaluates to 3)
print("hello world") # Function call expression (this one evaluates to None)
```

> [!TIP]
>
> ## Try running these examples in your own code editor
>
> By now you've already seen several examples of code embedded throughout textbook. These are not
> meant to be consumed passively; they were written for you to actively experiment with them in your
> own editor and/or Python terminal (which you can open just by typing `python` or `uv run python`
> in your terminal). As you go along, don't be afraid to modify the code. In fact, when it does
> work, you can even try to break things intentionally to get a better understanding of what is and
> isn't workable. This is all part of practicing!

A quick way to differentiate between expressions and statements is to remember that expressions have
values, while statements are complete instructions. In short:

- An **expression** is code that evaluates to a value.
  - You can use `eval()` to evaluate an expression (written as a string) to a value (but not
    `exec()`). E.g., `eval("2 + 1")` evaluates to 3.
- A **statement** is an instruction that does not evaluate to a value.
  - You can use `exec()` to execute a statement (written as a string) (but not `eval()`). E.g.,
    `exec("x = 3 + 5")` executes the statement `x = 3 + 5`, assigning `x` to have the value of `8`,
    but does not return a value.
  - Some expressions can appear as a statement when written on a line by themselves (this is called
    an _expression statement_), such as `len(x)` or `print("hello world")`.

## Exercise: Statements and Expressions

### Part A (expressions)

What will each of the following **expressions** evaluate to?

```python
3 + 3
5 * 2
10 / 2
5 ** 2
```

### Part B (statements)

Now consider these **statements**. After running them, what are the final values of `x`, `y`, and `z`?

```python
x = 10 % 3
y = x * 4
z = y * x
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready</summary>

```python
3 + 3  # 6
5 * 2  # 10
10 / 2  # 5
5 ** 2  # 25
```

```python
x = 10 % 3  # 1
y = x * 4  # 4
z = y * x  # 4
```

</details>

Next: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)<br>
Previous: [0.8. Other Useful Tips](../CH00/0.8.%20Other%20Useful%20Tips.md)
