ebook/CH01/1.2. Data Types.md, before:

# 1.2 Data Types

Python has eight categories of built-in data types:

|                              |                                |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| str                          | strings of text                |
| int, float, complex          | numeric variables              |
| bool                         | boolean (True/False) variables |
| bytes, bytearray, memoryview | binary variables               |
| NoneType                     | None type variables            |
| list, tuple, range           | sequence variables             |
| dict                         | mapping variables              |
| set, frozenset               | set variables                  |

We will discuss most of these data types in upcoming sections, some in this chapter and others in later ones. A few we
won't cover, but we will provide links if you want to learn more. But before we dive into specifics, first, we need to
deal with some facts that are true of all data types.

## Dynamic vs. Static Data Types

One important thing before we take a look at specific data types. One thing that makes Python different from many other
popular programming languages (like Java, Javascript, C++, and C#) is that Python variables are considered to be
"dynamic". This means that a Python variable is, by default, not inherently of a particular type but takes on the type
of whatever value you assign to it. This means that you can change it at will by assigning different values to it.

```Python
x = 3  # here x is an int, because I assigned an int to it
x = "dog"  # now x is a str, because I assigned a string to it
x = True  # now x is a boolean variable
x = "True"  # now x is back to being a string, because there are quotes
```

When a Python program is run, the Python interpreter makes an inference about what kind of variable is stored based on
the data. If there are quotes (single or double) around the data, it makes it a string. If it is a number with a
decimal, it makes it a float. If it is a number without a decimal, it makes it an int. If it is the word _True_ or
_False_, without quotes and with the first letter capitalized, it makes it a boolean variable.

Compare this to a language like C#, where the variables are "static", meaning they are defined as a particular type.
In C#, when you create a variable, you have to specify what kind it is. And if you tried to assign "dog" to x in the
example below, it would generate an error because x had been declared as an int.

```c#
int x = 3;
string y = "dog";
```

Python having dynamic variables makes it a very flexible programming language and makes programming in Python faster and
easier. But it also can lead to errors in the code that are harder to catch. In C#, if you try to assign "dog" to an
int, you will get an error and know immedietely that something is wrong. In Python, you won't get an error; it will let
you change what is stored in the variable from an int to string. This can be bad if you didn't mean to change the type
of the variable and were expecting it to be a certain type later.

In statically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _syntax errors_ at compile or run-time. A **syntax error** is
an error due to violating the rules of legal statements in the language.

In dynamically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _semantic errors_. A semantic error is when the program runs
without generating an error, but the program doesn't do what you intended it to do. These errors can be harder to catch
and debug. So the flexibility of Python comes with a price and means you need to think more carefully about your
variables.

## Data Type Casting

In Python, you can convert a kind of data or a variable from one type of data to another using datacasting.

```Python
x = int(5.8)  # x will be 5. Casting a float as an int truncates decimals
y = int("5")  # y will be the int 5, and no longer a string
z = int("dog")  # this line will generate an error; int() only converts numbers

x = float(5)  # x will be 5.0
y = float("5")  # x will be 5.0
z = float("5.2") # x will be 5.2, no longer a string
w = float("dog") # will generate an error; float() only converts numbers

x = str(5)  # x will be "5", now a string and not an int
y = str(5.0)  # y will be "5.0", now a string and not a float
```

Next: [1.3. Strings](1.3.%20Strings.md)<br>
Previous: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)

Commit message:

Update 1.2 with note about type hinting

ebook/CH01/1.2. Data Types.md, after:

# 1.2 Data Types

Python has eight categories of built-in data types:

|                              |                                |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| str                          | strings of text                |
| int, float, complex          | numeric variables              |
| bool                         | boolean (True/False) variables |
| bytes, bytearray, memoryview | binary variables               |
| NoneType                     | None type variables            |
| list, tuple, range           | sequence variables             |
| dict                         | mapping variables              |
| set, frozenset               | set variables                  |

We will discuss most of these data types in upcoming sections, some in this chapter and others in later ones. A few we
won't cover, but we will provide links if you want to learn more. But before we dive into specifics, first, we need to
deal with some facts that are true of all data types.

## Dynamic vs. Static Data Types

One important thing before we take a look at specific data types. One thing that makes Python different from many other
popular programming languages (like Java, Javascript, C++, and C#) is that Python variables are considered to be
"dynamic". This means that a Python variable is, by default, not inherently of a particular type but takes on the type
of whatever value you assign to it. This means that you can change it at will by assigning different values to it.

```Python
x = 3  # here x is an int, because I assigned an int to it
x = "dog"  # now x is a str, because I assigned a string to it
x = True  # now x is a boolean variable
x = "True"  # now x is back to being a string, because there are quotes
```

When a Python program is run, the Python interpreter makes an inference about what kind of variable is stored based on
the data. If there are quotes (single or double) around the data, it makes it a string. If it is a number with a
decimal, it makes it a float. If it is a number without a decimal, it makes it an int. If it is the word _True_ or
_False_, without quotes and with the first letter capitalized, it makes it a boolean variable.

Compare this to a language like C#, where the variables are "static", meaning they are defined as a particular type.
In C#, when you create a variable, you have to specify what kind it is. And if you tried to assign "dog" to x in the
example below, it would generate an error because x had been declared as an int.

```c#
int x = 3;
string y = "dog";
```

(Later in the course we'll introduce type hints, which are a way to communicate the type of a
variable to the reader and/or the code editor. Unfortunately, there isn't a way to enforce type
hints at the level of the Python interpreter, so you can still assign a string to a variable type
hinted as an `int` if you really want to.)

Python having dynamic variables makes it a very flexible programming language and makes programming in Python faster and
easier. But it also can lead to errors in the code that are harder to catch. In C#, if you try to assign "dog" to an
int, you will get an error and know immedietely that something is wrong. In Python, you won't get an error; it will let
you change what is stored in the variable from an int to string. This can be bad if you didn't mean to change the type
of the variable and were expecting it to be a certain type later.

In statically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _syntax errors_ at compile or run-time. A **syntax error** is
an error due to violating the rules of legal statements in the language.

In dynamically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _semantic errors_. A semantic error is when the program runs
without generating an error, but the program doesn't do what you intended it to do. These errors can be harder to catch
and debug. So the flexibility of Python comes with a price and means you need to think more carefully about your
variables.

## Data Type Casting

In Python, you can convert a kind of data or a variable from one type of data to another using datacasting.

```Python
x = int(5.8)  # x will be 5. Casting a float as an int truncates decimals
y = int("5")  # y will be the int 5, and no longer a string
z = int("dog")  # this line will generate an error; int() only converts numbers

x = float(5)  # x will be 5.0
y = float("5")  # x will be 5.0
z = float("5.2") # x will be 5.2, no longer a string
w = float("dog") # will generate an error; float() only converts numbers

x = str(5)  # x will be "5", now a string and not an int
y = str(5.0)  # y will be "5.0", now a string and not a float
```

Next: [1.3. Strings](1.3.%20Strings.md)<br>
Previous: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)
