# 1.2 Data types

Like we said earlier, data comes in many different flavors. Python has eight categories of built-in
data types (and there are many others associated with third-party packages, like Pandas and NumPy):

|                              |                                |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| str                          | strings of text                |
| int, float, complex          | numeric variables              |
| bool                         | boolean (True/False) variables |
| bytes, bytearray, memoryview | binary variables               |
| NoneType                     | None type variables            |
| list, tuple, range           | sequence variables             |
| dict                         | mapping variables              |
| set, frozenset               | set variables                  |

We will discuss most of these data types in upcoming sections, some in this chapter and others in
later ones. A few we won't cover, but we will provide links if you want to learn more. But before we
dive into specifics, first, we need to deal with some facts that are true of all data types.

## Dynamic vs. static data types

One important thing before we take a look at specific data types. One thing that makes Python
different from many other popular programming languages (like Java, Javascript, C++, and C#) is that
Python variables are considered to be "dynamic". This means that a Python variable is, by default,
not inherently of a particular type but takes on the type of whatever value you assign to it. This
means that you can change it at will by assigning different values to it.

```Python
x = 3  # here x is an int, because I assigned an int to it
x = "dog"  # now x is a str, because I assigned a string to it
x = True  # now x is a boolean variable
x = "True"  # now x is back to being a string, because there are quotes
```

When a Python program is run, the Python interpreter makes an inference about what kind of variable
is stored based on the data. If there are quotes (single or double) around the data, it makes it a
string. If it is a number with a decimal, it makes it a float. If it is a number without a decimal,
it makes it an int. If it is the word _True_ or _False_, without quotes and with the first letter
capitalized, it makes it a boolean variable.

Compare this to a language like C#, where the variables are "static", meaning they are defined as a
particular type. In C#, when you create a variable, you have to specify what kind it is. And if you
tried to assign "dog" to x in the example below, it would generate an error because x had been
declared as an int.

```c#
int x = 3;
string y = "dog";
```

(Later in the course we'll introduce type hints, which are a way to communicate the type of a
variable to the reader and/or the code editor. Unfortunately, there isn't a way to enforce type
hints at the level of the Python interpreter, so you can still assign a string to a variable type
hinted as an `int` if you really want to.)

Python having dynamic variables makes it a very flexible programming language and makes programming
in Python faster and easier. But it also can lead to errors in the code that are harder to catch. In
C#, if you try to assign "dog" to an int, you will get an error and know immedietely that something
is wrong. In Python, you won't get an error; it will let you change what is stored in the variable
from an int to string. This can be bad if you didn't mean to change the type of the variable and
were expecting it to be a certain type later.

In statically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _syntax errors_ at compile or run-time. A
syntax error is an error due to violating the rules of legal statements in the language.

In dynamically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more _semantic errors_. A semantic error is
when the program runs without generating an error, but the program doesn't do what you intended it
to do. These errors can be harder to catch and debug. So the flexibility of Python comes with a
price and means you need to think more carefully about your variables.

## Data type casting

You can convert a kind of data or a variable from one type of data to another using type casting.

```Python
x = int(5.8)  # x will be 5. Casting a float as an int truncates decimals
y = int("5")  # y will be the int 5, and no longer a string
z = int("dog")  # this line will generate an error; int() only converts numbers

x = float(5)  # x will be 5.0
y = float("5")  # x will be 5.0
z = float("5.2") # x will be 5.2, no longer a string
w = float("dog") # will generate an error; float() only converts numbers

x = str(5)  # x will be "5", now a string and not an int
y = str(5.0)  # y will be "5.0", now a string and not a float
```

And of course, you can string together multiple casts if you want.

```python
x = int(float("5.2"))  # x will be 5, because we first convert "5.2" to a float and then to an int
```

## Exercise: Data type casting

What will each of the following expressions evaluate to? What type will each result be? Make
predictions before you try to run each of these lines in the interpreter. Compare your predictions
to the actual results — what did you get wrong? Can you trace the logic to figure out why things
turned out different than how you expected?

```python
int(5)
int(2.51)
int(-2.99)
int("5")
int("5.5")
int("cat")
int(True)
int(False)

float(5)
float(2.51)
float(-2.99)
float("5")
float("5.5")
float("cat")
float(True)
float(False)

str(5)
str(5.0)
str(True)
str(False)

str(int(True))
str(int(False))
str(int(5.2))
int(str(1))
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready</summary>

```python
int(5)       # 5
int(2.51)    # 2
int(-2.99)   # -2
int("5")     # 5
int("5.5")   # ValueError
int("cat")   # ValueError
int(True)    # 1
int(False)   # 0

float(5)     # 5.0
float(2.51)  # 2.51
float(-2.99) # -2.99
float("5")   # 5.0
float("5.5") # 5.5
float("cat") # ValueError
float(True)  # 1.0
float(False) # 0.0

str(5)       # "5"
str(5.0)     # "5.0"
str(True)    # "True"
str(False)   # "False"

str(int(True))    # "1"
str(int(False))   # "0"
str(int(5.2))     # "5"
int(str(1))       # 1
```

</details>

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-START -->

Next: [1.3. Strings](1.3.%20Strings.md)<br>
Previous: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-END -->
