ebook/CH01/1.3. Strings.md, before:

# 1.3 Strings

Strings in Python are sequences of text and are surrounded by either single or double quotes.

```python
x = "dog"
y = 'the cat is on the table'
```

Matching quotes of the same type (single or double) begin and end a string. Therefore, if you want to include a quote in a string, you can use the other kind of quote to start and end the string, as in _a_ and _b_ below. If you need to use the same kind of quote in a string that you used to start it (as in variable _c_ below), you can use the special escape character backslash (\\) to tell Python to treat the character after it as part of the string, not as the marker of the end of the string.

```python
a = "isn't"
b = 'the baby said "I am hungry"'
c = 'the baby said "I\'m hungry"'
```

Strings can also be multiple lines. If you have 64-bit Python installed, string lengths are really only limited by computer memory, and so if you have 32 GB of RAM on your computer, you could theoretically have a 32 GB string (billions of words).

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

## Escape Characters in Strings

If you want to put a line break in a string (like you would using the RETURN key in a word processor), you have to do something special. You can't just hit return in Python because Python interprets that as the end of the line. The following code would get an error:

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice;
or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

As you can see from the color coding, where I hit return makes Python think the string is over, and it starts trying to interpret the rest of the text as Python code. So if we want to put in a line break, we need to use the special newline "escape character", "\\n".

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice;\nor if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

As you can see, if we print out the string above, it inserts a line break where the special character was:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42456070/213057646-9ee0a333-ebf7-4c92-b925-7e239e1d2698.png)

In general, a backslash (`\`) tells Python to do something special with the next character. There are other escape characters that are sometimes useful:

- \\t - inserts a tab
- \\\\, \\', \\" - tells Python to ignore the next character, if you actually want a backslash or quote in a string

## String Indexing and Slicing

Strings can be thought of as sequences of characters, meaning that you can use a numeric index to access a part of it.

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"

print(the_meno[0])
print(the_meno[4])
print(the_meno[-3])
print(the_meno[1:6])
print(the_meno[10:])
print(the_meno[:25])
```

If you open your interactive Terminal and type in the commands above, you will get the output:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42456070/213057046-b637a314-b943-408e-96ca-19ddd8ed5a15.png)
The process above is called _indexing_. To index a sequence like a string, we put square brackets after a string variable and then a number inside. This accesses the character at that spot in the string, counting from the beginning. Critically, you must remember that in Python, we start counting at 0. So the_meno\[0\] accesses the first spot in the string, and the_meno\[4\] accesses the fifth spot in the string. As we will learn later, indexing works with any sequence data type (like lists).

We can also access a large stretch of a string, a process called _slicing_. To slice a string, we use a colon. For example, the_meno\[1:6\] accesses the stretch of characters starting with the second character (remember, we start counting at 0, so the 1 before the colon means the second spot). The number after the colon indicates where we will stop, and the character at that number won't be printed. So \[1:6\] means the second character through the sixth character. If you wanted to print the second word through the fourth word in the string ("you tell me"), what numbers would you use?

You can also use indexing to split a string at a particular location:

```python
chomsky = "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously."
split_index = 10
chomsky1 = chomsky[:split_index]  # result is "colorless"
chomsky2 = chomsky[split_index:] # result is " green ideas sleep furiously."
```

## String Functions and Methods

Strings in Python are objects, and as with all built-in objects in Python, there are a number of functions and methods you can use with them. A quick note on terminology, a function is independent of an object and something we put the object in and get back some kind of data as a result. One example is the len() function. If we put a string into the len() function as below, we get back the length of the string (in characters).

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"

# after the following line, meno_length = 186, the number of characters in the
# string
meno_length = len(the_meno)
```

In contrast to functions (which we pass the string into and get something back), methods are a part of the string object and define a bunch of useful things we can do with or to the string. Some commonly-used string methods are shown below:

```python
# each of the below creates a new string, stored in x
# the first converts the first character to upper case.
# the second converts the first letter after each space to a capital
# changes the string stored in food
food = "pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"
x = food.capitalize()  # result is x = "Pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"
x = food.title()  # result is x = "Pizza Is 1St And Ice Cream Is 2Nd
x = food.upper()  # result is x = "PIZZA IS 1ST AND ICE CREAM IS 2ND"
x = food.lower() # result is x = "pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"

# creates a new string 10 characters long, padded with spaces
food = "pizza"
x = food.ljust(10)   # result is x = "pizza     "
x = food.rjust(10)  # result is x = "     pizza"
x = food.center(10) # result is x = "  pizza   " since odd, extra space is at end

# .find() returns the position of the first occurrence of the searched character
# .count() returns the number of times the searched character is in the string
# .replace returns a new string with the specified substitution
food = "pizza"
x = food.find("z")  # results in x = 2
x = food.count("i")  #  results in x = 1
x = food.replace("z", "s")  # results in x = "pissa"


# .strip() removes specified character from ends of string
# uses a space if none is provided
# useful for removing spaces and tabs
some_sentences = "  the dog chased the cat.\nthe cat chased the mouse. "
x = some_sentences.strip()
# result is x = "the dog chased the cat.\nthe cat chased the mouse."

# this would do nothing, since the . is not at the end of some_sentences
y = some_sentences.strip(".")

# but this would remove the . because the spaces had already been removed
y = x.strip(".")

# .split() splits a stsring into a list based on the specified character,
# uses a space if none is provided
# notice that it automatically removes the space
x = some_sentences.split()
# result is ['the', 'dog', 'chased', 'the', 'cat.', 'the', 'cat', 'chased',
#            'the', 'mouse.']


# works with newline characteres
x = some_sentences.split("\n")
# result is x = ['  the dog chased the cat.', 'the cat chased the mouse. ']
# but notice since we didnt split on spaces, the spaces were not removed.
# could fix by doing
x = some_sentences.strip()
y = x.split('\n')

# works with tabs too.
# Somewhat hard to read, but the sentence below has tabs for spaces
# tabs are and spaces are treated the same by .split()
another_sentence = "\tthe\tdog\tchased\tthe\tcat"
x = another_sentence.split() # result is x=['the', 'dog', 'chased', 'the', 'cat']
```

## Concatenating Strings

Strings can be concatenated by "adding" them

```python
x = "dog"
y = "cat"
z = x + y  # result is z = "dogcat".
z = x + " " + y  # result is z = "dog cat"
z = x + "\n" + y
# result is:
'''
dog
cat
'''

# you can also "multiply" a string to get many copies of it
y = 4 * x  # result is y = "dogdogdogdog"
y = 4 * x + " "  # result is y = 'dogdogdogdog '
y = [4 * (x + " ")]  # result is y = "dog dog dog dog "

# the example below combines multiplication copying plus string slicing to
# remove the final space. the [:-1] says use everything except the last character
# but you have to use parentheses to enforce the right order of operations!
# if i left off the outer parentheses, the [:-1] would act on the (x + " "),
# removing the space, instead of acting on the entire 4 * (x + " ")
y = (4 * (x + " "))[:-1]  # result is y = "dog dog dog dog"
```

## String Formatting

There are many ways you can format strings in Python. We have already covered the string methods .ljust(), r.just(),
and .center(). But there is a lot more we can do.

Let's say we want to substitute variables in a string. We could use concatenation:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"
sentence = "My name is " + name + " and I like " + favorite_food + "."
```

But that can get complicated if there are many of them and limits our flexibility. Instead, we can use the .format()
method:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"
sentence = "My name is {} and I like {}".format(name, favorite_food)
```

The `.format()` method looks for squiggly brackets, { }, in a string and then takes the variable names in the
`.format()` parentheses and substitutes them in. For every pair of squiggly brackets, there must be a variable to go
with them.

There are also a whole bunch of formatting options you can add:

```python
name1 = "Jon"
food1 = "pizza"
rating1 = 10.0

name2 = "Andrew"
food2 = "strawberries"
rating2 = 7.625

header = "name food rating\n"
data1 = "{} {} {}\n".format(name1, food1, rating1)
data2 = "{} {} {}\n".format(name2, food2, rating2)
dataset = header + data1 + data2
print(dataset)

'''
The result would look like this:
name food rating
Jon pizza 10.0
Andrew strawberries 7.625
'''
```

What if we want things to line up a little better:

```python
header = "{:10s} {:20s} {:5s}\n".format("name", "food", "rating")
data1 = "{:10s} {:20s} {:0.2f}\n".format(name1, food1, rating1)
data2 = "{:10s} {:20s} {:0.2f}\n".format(name2, food2, rating2)
dataset = header + data1 + data2
print(dataset)

'''
The result would look like this:
name       food                 rating
Jon        pizza                10.00
Andrew     strawberries         7.62
'''
```

Within each squiggly bracket, you can put all kinds of codes that affect the formatting. These almost all start with
a colon (indicating to Python that what comes next is a string formatting code). The 's' and 'f' tell Python that the
data going there is a string or a float, respectively. The numbers tell Python something about how to format that data
type. A number before a string indicator says to pad it with spaces out to that length (similar to using .ljust() ).
A number before a float indicator tells Python how many significant digits to display. It will truncate the float or
add extra zeros to make it the appropriate length.

However, my favorite way to format strings is using f-strings. All you have to do is put an `f` in front of the string,
and then you can directly reference variables within the string by putting them inside curly braces. In fact, you can
put any valid Python expression inside the curly braces, and it will be evaluated and substituted in. This makes
the formatting much easier to read, but it is a Python feature that is relatively new (introduced in Python 3.6).

```python
name1 = "Stefan"
food1 = "pizza"
rating1 = 10.0

name2 = "Andrew"
food2 = "strawberries"
rating2 = 7.625

sentence1 = f"{name1} likes {food1} with a rating of {rating1}"
sentence2 = f"{name2} likes {food2} with a rating of {rating2}"

print(sentence1)
print(sentence2)

'''
The result would look like this:
Stefan likes pizza with a rating of 10.0
Andrew likes strawberries with a rating of 7.625
'''

# formatting options
sentence3 = f"{name1} likes {food1.lower()} with a rating of {rating1:.3f}"
print(sentence3)

'''
The result would look like this:
Stefan likes pizza with a rating of 10.000
'''

```

There are many more string formatting options that can be read about
[here](https://www.w3schools.com/python/ref_string_format.asp):

Next: [1.4. Numbers](1.4.%20Numeric%20Data%20Types.md)<br>
Previous: [1.2. Data Types](1.2.%20Data%20Types.md)

Commit message:

Update 1.3 with information about string reversal

ebook/CH01/1.3. Strings.md, after:

# 1.3 Strings

Strings in Python are sequences of text and are surrounded by either single or double quotes.

```python
x = "dog"
y = 'the cat is on the table'
```

Matching quotes of the same type (single or double) begin and end a string. Therefore, if you want to include a quote in a string, you can use the other kind of quote to start and end the string, as in _a_ and _b_ below. If you need to use the same kind of quote in a string that you used to start it (as in variable _c_ below), you can use the special escape character backslash (\\) to tell Python to treat the character after it as part of the string, not as the marker of the end of the string.

```python
a = "isn't"
b = 'the baby said "I am hungry"'
c = 'the baby said "I\'m hungry"'
```

Strings can also be multiple lines. If you have 64-bit Python installed, string lengths are really only limited by computer memory, and so if you have 32 GB of RAM on your computer, you could theoretically have a 32 GB string (billions of words).

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

## Escape Characters in Strings

If you want to put a line break in a string (like you would using the RETURN key in a word processor), you have to do something special. You can't just hit return in Python because Python interprets that as the end of the line. The following code would get an error:

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice;
or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

As you can see from the color coding, where I hit return makes Python think the string is over, and it starts trying to interpret the rest of the text as Python code. So if we want to put in a line break, we need to use the special newline "escape character", "\\n".

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice;\nor if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"
```

As you can see, if we print out the string above, it inserts a line break where the special character was:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42456070/213057646-9ee0a333-ebf7-4c92-b925-7e239e1d2698.png)

In general, a backslash (`\`) tells Python to do something special with the next character. There are other escape characters that are sometimes useful:

- \\t - inserts a tab
- \\\\, \\', \\" - tells Python to ignore the next character, if you actually want a backslash or quote in a string

## String Indexing and Slicing

Strings can be thought of as sequences of characters, meaning that you can use a numeric index to access a part of it.

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"

print(the_meno[0])
print(the_meno[4])
print(the_meno[-3])
print(the_meno[1:6])
print(the_meno[10:])
print(the_meno[:25])
```

If you open your interactive Terminal and type in the commands above, you will get the output:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42456070/213057046-b637a314-b943-408e-96ca-19ddd8ed5a15.png)
The process above is called _indexing_. To index a sequence like a string, we put square brackets after a string variable and then a number inside. This accesses the character at that spot in the string, counting from the beginning. Critically, you must remember that in Python, we start counting at 0. So the_meno\[0\] accesses the first spot in the string, and the_meno\[4\] accesses the fifth spot in the string. As we will learn later, indexing works with any sequence data type (like lists).

We can also access a large stretch of a string, a process called _slicing_. To slice a string, we use a colon. For example, the_meno\[1:6\] accesses the stretch of characters starting with the second character (remember, we start counting at 0, so the 1 before the colon means the second spot). The number after the colon indicates where we will stop, and the character at that number won't be printed. So \[1:6\] means the second character through the sixth character. If you wanted to print the second word through the fourth word in the string ("you tell me"), what numbers would you use?

You can also use indexing to split a string at a particular location:

```python
chomsky = "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously."
split_index = 10
chomsky1 = chomsky[:split_index]  # result is "colorless"
chomsky2 = chomsky[split_index:] # result is " green ideas sleep furiously."
```

Lastly, you can also use string slicing to _reverse_ a string (and the same syntax works with lists,
as you'll see later):

```python
chomsky = "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously."
reversed_chomsky = chomsky[::-1]
print(reversed_chomsky) # result is ".ylsuoiruf peels saedi neerg sselroloC"
```

## String Functions and Methods

Strings in Python are objects, and as with all built-in objects in Python, there are a number of functions and methods you can use with them. A quick note on terminology, a function is independent of an object and something we put the object in and get back some kind of data as a result. One example is the len() function. If we put a string into the len() function as below, we get back the length of the string (in characters).

```python
the_meno = "Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor by practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"

# after the following line, meno_length = 186, the number of characters in the
# string
meno_length = len(the_meno)
```

In contrast to functions (which we pass the string into and get something back), methods are a part of the string object and define a bunch of useful things we can do with or to the string. Some commonly-used string methods are shown below:

```python
# each of the below creates a new string, stored in x
# the first converts the first character to upper case.
# the second converts the first letter after each space to a capital
# changes the string stored in food
food = "pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"
x = food.capitalize()  # result is x = "Pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"
x = food.title()  # result is x = "Pizza Is 1St And Ice Cream Is 2Nd
x = food.upper()  # result is x = "PIZZA IS 1ST AND ICE CREAM IS 2ND"
x = food.lower() # result is x = "pizza is 1st and ice cream is 2nd"

# creates a new string 10 characters long, padded with spaces
food = "pizza"
x = food.ljust(10)   # result is x = "pizza     "
x = food.rjust(10)  # result is x = "     pizza"
x = food.center(10) # result is x = "  pizza   " since odd, extra space is at end

# .find() returns the position of the first occurrence of the searched character
# .count() returns the number of times the searched character is in the string
# .replace returns a new string with the specified substitution
food = "pizza"
x = food.find("z")  # results in x = 2
x = food.count("i")  #  results in x = 1
x = food.replace("z", "s")  # results in x = "pissa"


# .strip() removes specified character from ends of string
# uses a space if none is provided
# useful for removing spaces and tabs
some_sentences = "  the dog chased the cat.\nthe cat chased the mouse. "
x = some_sentences.strip()
# result is x = "the dog chased the cat.\nthe cat chased the mouse."

# this would do nothing, since the . is not at the end of some_sentences
y = some_sentences.strip(".")

# but this would remove the . because the spaces had already been removed
y = x.strip(".")

# .split() splits a stsring into a list based on the specified character,
# uses a space if none is provided
# notice that it automatically removes the space
x = some_sentences.split()
# result is ['the', 'dog', 'chased', 'the', 'cat.', 'the', 'cat', 'chased',
#            'the', 'mouse.']


# works with newline characteres
x = some_sentences.split("\n")
# result is x = ['  the dog chased the cat.', 'the cat chased the mouse. ']
# but notice since we didnt split on spaces, the spaces were not removed.
# could fix by doing
x = some_sentences.strip()
y = x.split('\n')

# works with tabs too.
# Somewhat hard to read, but the sentence below has tabs for spaces
# tabs are and spaces are treated the same by .split()
another_sentence = "\tthe\tdog\tchased\tthe\tcat"
x = another_sentence.split() # result is x=['the', 'dog', 'chased', 'the', 'cat']
```

## Concatenating Strings

Strings can be concatenated by "adding" them

```python
x = "dog"
y = "cat"
z = x + y  # result is z = "dogcat".
z = x + " " + y  # result is z = "dog cat"
z = x + "\n" + y
# result is:
'''
dog
cat
'''

# you can also "multiply" a string to get many copies of it
y = 4 * x  # result is y = "dogdogdogdog"
y = 4 * x + " "  # result is y = 'dogdogdogdog '
y = [4 * (x + " ")]  # result is y = "dog dog dog dog "

# the example below combines multiplication copying plus string slicing to
# remove the final space. the [:-1] says use everything except the last character
# but you have to use parentheses to enforce the right order of operations!
# if i left off the outer parentheses, the [:-1] would act on the (x + " "),
# removing the space, instead of acting on the entire 4 * (x + " ")
y = (4 * (x + " "))[:-1]  # result is y = "dog dog dog dog"
```

## String Formatting

There are many ways you can format strings in Python. We have already covered the string methods .ljust(), r.just(),
and .center(). But there is a lot more we can do.

Let's say we want to substitute variables in a string. We could use concatenation:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"
sentence = "My name is " + name + " and I like " + favorite_food + "."
```

But that can get complicated if there are many of them and limits our flexibility. Instead, we can use the .format()
method:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"
sentence = "My name is {} and I like {}".format(name, favorite_food)
```

The `.format()` method looks for squiggly brackets, { }, in a string and then takes the variable names in the
`.format()` parentheses and substitutes them in. For every pair of squiggly brackets, there must be a variable to go
with them.

There are also a whole bunch of formatting options you can add:

```python
name1 = "Jon"
food1 = "pizza"
rating1 = 10.0

name2 = "Andrew"
food2 = "strawberries"
rating2 = 7.625

header = "name food rating\n"
data1 = "{} {} {}\n".format(name1, food1, rating1)
data2 = "{} {} {}\n".format(name2, food2, rating2)
dataset = header + data1 + data2
print(dataset)

'''
The result would look like this:
name food rating
Jon pizza 10.0
Andrew strawberries 7.625
'''
```

What if we want things to line up a little better:

```python
header = "{:10s} {:20s} {:5s}\n".format("name", "food", "rating")
data1 = "{:10s} {:20s} {:0.2f}\n".format(name1, food1, rating1)
data2 = "{:10s} {:20s} {:0.2f}\n".format(name2, food2, rating2)
dataset = header + data1 + data2
print(dataset)

'''
The result would look like this:
name       food                 rating
Jon        pizza                10.00
Andrew     strawberries         7.62
'''
```

Within each squiggly bracket, you can put all kinds of codes that affect the formatting. These almost all start with
a colon (indicating to Python that what comes next is a string formatting code). The 's' and 'f' tell Python that the
data going there is a string or a float, respectively. The numbers tell Python something about how to format that data
type. A number before a string indicator says to pad it with spaces out to that length (similar to using .ljust() ).
A number before a float indicator tells Python how many significant digits to display. It will truncate the float or
add extra zeros to make it the appropriate length.

However, my favorite way to format strings is using f-strings. All you have to do is put an `f` in front of the string,
and then you can directly reference variables within the string by putting them inside curly braces. In fact, you can
put any valid Python expression inside the curly braces, and it will be evaluated and substituted in. This makes
the formatting much easier to read, but it is a Python feature that is relatively new (introduced in Python 3.6).

```python
name1 = "Stefan"
food1 = "pizza"
rating1 = 10.0

name2 = "Andrew"
food2 = "strawberries"
rating2 = 7.625

sentence1 = f"{name1} likes {food1} with a rating of {rating1}"
sentence2 = f"{name2} likes {food2} with a rating of {rating2}"

print(sentence1)
print(sentence2)

'''
The result would look like this:
Stefan likes pizza with a rating of 10.0
Andrew likes strawberries with a rating of 7.625
'''

# formatting options
sentence3 = f"{name1} likes {food1.lower()} with a rating of {rating1:.3f}"
print(sentence3)

'''
The result would look like this:
Stefan likes pizza with a rating of 10.000
'''

```

There are many more string formatting options that can be read about
[here](https://www.w3schools.com/python/ref_string_format.asp):

Next: [1.4. Numbers](1.4.%20Numeric%20Data%20Types.md)<br>
Previous: [1.2. Data Types](1.2.%20Data%20Types.md)
