ebook/CH01/1.5. Bool, Binary, and None Data Types.md, before:

# Bool, Binary, and None Data Types

## Bool Data Type

"Bool" variables (short for "Boolean") are a special data type that stores the values `True` or `False`.

```python
x = True
y = False
```

You can store the result of a comparison in a variable, resulting in it being a `bool`.

```python
x = 5
y = 0
z = x > y  # this will store True in z, because x is greater than y
z = x == y  # this will store False in z, because x is not equal to y
z = x < y  # this will store False in z, because x is not less than y
```

We haven't covered operators yet (we will in [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)), but note the important difference
between a single equals sign (\=) and a double equals sign (\=\=) in Python. A single equals sign is used to assign the
value in the variable on the right to a variable on the left, whereas a double equal sign is used to compare values or
variables to see if they are the same.

Bool variables can also be used the same way we cast (convert) variables to `int()`, `str()`, or `float()`.

```python
x = bool("dog")
y = bool(2)
```

When you cast with `bool()`, it almost always converts a variable to `True`, except in a small set of exceptions:

- Using `bool` on a string always results in `True` unless the string is empty (i.e., `x = ""`)
- Using `bool` on a number (`float`, `int`, or `complex`) always evaluates to `True` unless the number is zero `0`
- Using `bool` on empty collections (e.g., lists, sets, dictionaries) results in a `False`

These statements almost always evaluate to `True`, as in the examples above, which would then store `True` in the variables
`x` and `y`. The only time using the `bool()`

For more information about boolean types check out the official documentation: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#boolean-operations-and-or-not

## Binary Data Types

Python has a special set of data types for binary calculations: `byte`, `bytearray`, and `memoryview`. We are not going to
cover them in this class, but more information is available here:
https://www.pythonforbeginners.com/basics/bytes-in-python
https://www.pythonforbeginners.com/data-types/bytearray-in-python
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/memoryview-in-python/

## None Data Type

None is a special data type in Python that is used to specify an empty variable. `None` is not the same as zero `0`, `False`,
or an empty string `""`. It can be useful sometimes to initially set a variable to `None` and then change it later in a
program. That way, you can have the variable from the beginning for testing purposes and test to see when it gets
changed. `None` is also one of the few cases where casting as `bool()` results in `False`.

```python
x = None
```

Next: [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)<br>
Previous: [1.4. Numbers](1.4.%20Numeric%20Data%20Types.md)

Commit message:

Update 1.5 with more explanation of None

ebook/CH01/1.5. Bool, Binary, and None Data Types.md, after:

# Bool, Binary, and None Data Types

## Bool Data Type

"Bool" variables (short for "Boolean") are a special data type that stores the values `True` or `False`.

```python
x = True
y = False
```

You can store the result of a comparison in a variable, resulting in it being a `bool`.

```python
x = 5
y = 0
z = x > y  # this will store True in z, because x is greater than y
z = x == y  # this will store False in z, because x is not equal to y
z = x < y  # this will store False in z, because x is not less than y
```

We haven't covered operators yet (we will in [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)), but note the
important difference between a single equals sign (\=) and a double equals sign (\=\=) in Python. A
single equals sign is used to _assign_ the value in the variable on the right to a variable on the
left, whereas a double equal sign is used to _compare_ values or variables to see if they are the
same.

Boolean variables can also be used the same way we cast (convert) variables to `int()`, `str()`, or `float()`.

```python
x = bool("dog")
y = bool(2)
```

When you cast with `bool()`, it almost always converts a variable to `True`, except in a small set of exceptions:

- Using `bool` on a string always results in `True` unless the string is empty (i.e., `x = ""`)
- Using `bool` on a number (`float`, `int`, or `complex`) always evaluates to `True` unless the number is zero `0`
- Using `bool` on empty collections (e.g., lists, sets, dictionaries) results in a `False`

These statements almost always evaluate to `True`, as in the examples above, which would then store `True` in the variables
`x` and `y`. The only time using the `bool()`

For more information about boolean types check out the official documentation: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#boolean-operations-and-or-not

## Binary Data Types

Python has a special set of data types for binary calculations: `byte`, `bytearray`, and `memoryview`. We are not going to
cover them in this class, but more information is available here:
https://www.pythonforbeginners.com/basics/bytes-in-python
https://www.pythonforbeginners.com/data-types/bytearray-in-python
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/memoryview-in-python/

## None Data Type

None is a special data type in Python that is used to specify an empty variable. `None` is not the same as zero `0`, `False`,
or an empty string `""`. It can be useful sometimes to initially set a variable to `None` and then change it later in a
program. That way, you can have the variable from the beginning for testing purposes and test to see when it gets
changed. `None` is also one of the few cases where casting as `bool()` results in `False`.

```python
x = None

if x is not None:
    print("do something with x")
else:
    print("x is None, so there is nothing to be done")
```

Next: [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)<br>
Previous: [1.4. Numbers](1.4.%20Numeric%20Data%20Types.md)
