ebook/CH01/1.7. Conditionals.md, before:

# 1.7 Conditionals

An important part of all programming languages is a _conditional statement_, a branching where (usually) a comparison
operator is used to decide if a particular piece of code should be run. In a conditional statement, each conditional
test must end with a colon.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
print("Pizza is my favorite food!")

if favorite_food == "broccoli":
	print("Broccoli is the most dangerous vegetable.")
	print("It tries to warn you with its terrible taste.")

if favorite_food == "apple_pie":
	print("Apple pie is pretty good!")
		print("It is certainly better than broccoli...")  # illegal! (see below)

elif favorite_food == "broccoli"):
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

The code that will execute if the conditional is `True` is typically on the following line, indented
or spaced to the right. Python uses spaces and/or tabs to indicate which code "belongs in" the `if`
statement. This makes Python unusual, as most languages use some kind of brackets or parentheses for
this.

In the code above, the first print statement ("I am glad you like pizza!") will only execute if
"pizza" is stored in `favorite_food` because it is tabbed over. But the second print statement will
execute no matter what because it is tabbed fully to the left. Because it is aligned with the `if`
statement, not inside of it, it doesn't "belong in" the `if` statement. In the second if statement,
both print statements will execute because both are tabbed inside the `if` statement. The third `if`
statement is actually an illegal statement because the two `print` statements are not tabbed the
same amount. Python cares about tabs and spaces, and they must be used correctly.

Conditionals can be complex with multiple alternatives. When an `if` is followed by an `elif`,
Python will treat this like saying, "if the previous condition is not true, then try this
condition". An `else` statement specifies what to do if none of the preceding `if` or `elif`
statements are `True`.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
elif favorite_food == "broccoli":
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

Note the important way the two examples below are different. In the first example, the first two
conditionals are an `if` and `elif`, and so they are mutually exclusive. Python checks to see if the
`if` is `True` first, and if it is, exits the conditional altogether without even checking to see if
the `elif` is `True`. So in this example, only "This is a lucky number!" will print. In the second
example, there are two `if` statements, so they are effectively independent, and the `else`
statement belongs to the second `if` statement. In this case, both "That is a lucky number!" and
"That is a single-digit positive number" print.

```python
favorite_number = 7
if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
elif 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")

if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
if 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")
```

## Embedded if-else Statements

Conditionals can be embedded inside each other. Just use the correct tabbing.

```python
name = "Jon"
text_response = "My favorite food is pizza and I hate broccoli."

if "pizza" in text_response:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon said something about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon said something about pizza.")
else:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
```

## Logical Operators and if-else Statements

Conditionals can also use logical operators to combine multiple comparisons.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"

if name == "Andrew" and favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Andrew's favorite food is pizza")
	# the line above will not execute because both comparisons were not True


if name == "Andrew" or favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Either the name is Andrew or the favorite food is pizza. Maybe both!")
	# the above statement will execute because at least one of the conditionals
	# is True
```

## Short-hand if-else Statements (Ternary Operator)

Above, we noted that in a Python conditional, the code that will be executed if the condition is
`True` is usually on the next line, tabbed over. Python does allow you to do it all in one line:

```python
print("Yay pizza!") if favorite_food == "pizza" else print("Boo pizza!")
```

These "short-hand if" statements — aka, ternary expressions — are legal in Python, but they are
usually dispreferred as a convention because they make the code less readable and are harder to edit
if you end up needing to have multiple lines of code execute within the `if` or `else` block.

## The Pass statement

The final thing to note is that if-else statements cannot be empty; they must have code inside them.
The following code would get an error because nothing is tabbed inside the `if`:

```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:

print(a)
print(b)
```

However, if, for some reason, you need to have an empty `if` statement (or any other kind of
statement that requires a tabbed-over code), you can use the `pass` statement. The `pass` statement
is just a way of telling Python to do nothing if that conditional evaluates to `True`.

```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:
	pass

print(a)
print(b)

```

Pass statements are often useful as a way to temporarily get the code to run without an error if you
haven't figured out what you want to put inside the conditional.

## Exercise: Conditional Statements

For each of the following code blocks, predict what will be printed. Make your predictions before
running the code. Compare your predictions to the actual results — what did you get wrong? Can you
trace the logic to figure out why things turned out different than how you expected?

```python
# 1) Basic if statements
x = 5
if x > 3:
    print("x is greater than 3")
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 2) Branching logic
score = 85
if score >= 90:
    print("A")
elif score >= 80:
    print("B")
elif score >= 70:
    print("C")
else:
    print("F")

# 3) Nested if statements
name = "Everard"
age = 27
if name == "Everard":
    if age >= 18:
        print("Everard is an adult")
    else:
        print("Everard is a minor")
else:
    print("Not Everard")

# 4) Logical operators
x = 5
y = 10
if x > 3 and y < 15:
    print("Both conditions are true")
if x > 3 or y > 15:
    print("At least one condition is true")
if not (x > 3):
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 5) Ternary operator
age = 20
print("Adult") if age >= 18 else print("Minor")

# 6) Pass statement
x = 5
if x > 3:
    pass
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")
print("This will always print")

# 7) Complex nested conditions
score = 85
attendance = 0.75
if score >= 80:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Pass with good attendance")
    else:
        print("Pass but attendance needs improvement")
else:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Fail but good attendance")
    else:
        print("Fail and poor attendance")
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready</summary>

```python
# 1) Basic if-else
x = 5
if x > 3:
    print("x is greater than 3")  # This will print
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 2) Branching logic
score = 85
if score >= 90:
    print("A")
elif score >= 80:
    print("B")  # This will print
elif score >= 70:
    print("C")
else:
    print("F")

# 3) Nested if statements
name = "Everard"
age = 27
if name == "Everard":
    if age >= 18:
        print("Everard is an adult")  # This will print
    else:
        print("Everard is a minor")
else:
    print("Not Everard")

# 4) Logical operators
x = 5
y = 10
if x > 3 and y < 15:
    print("Both conditions are true")  # This will print
if x > 3 or y > 15:
    print("At least one condition is true")  # This will print
if not (x > 3):
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 5) Ternary operator
age = 20
print("Adult") if age >= 18 else print("Minor")  # Will print "Adult"

# 6) Pass statement
x = 5
if x > 3:
    pass  # The pass statement does nothing
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")
print("This will always print")  # This will print

# 7) Complex nested conditions
score = 85
attendance = 0.75
if score >= 80:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Pass with good attendance")
    else:
        print("Pass but attendance needs improvement")  # This will print
else:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Fail but good attendance")
    else:
        print("Fail and poor attendance")
```

</details>

Next: [1.8. Lab 1](1.8.%20Lab%201.md)<br>
Previous: [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)

Commit message:

Update 1.7 point to 1.6 and add example with boolean expressions

ebook/CH01/1.7. Conditionals.md, after:

# 1.7 Conditionals

An important part of all programming languages is a _conditional statement_, a branching where (usually) a comparison
operator is used to decide if a particular piece of code should be run. In a conditional statement, each conditional
test must end with a colon.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
print("Pizza is my favorite food!")

if favorite_food == "broccoli":
	print("Broccoli is the most dangerous vegetable.")
	print("It tries to warn you with its terrible taste.")

if favorite_food == "apple_pie":
	print("Apple pie is pretty good!")
		print("It is certainly better than broccoli...")  # illegal! (see below)

elif favorite_food == "broccoli"):
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

The code that will execute if the conditional is `True` is typically on the following line, indented
or spaced to the right. Python uses spaces and/or tabs to indicate which code "belongs in" the `if`
statement. This makes Python unusual, as most languages use some kind of brackets or parentheses for
this.

In the code above, the first print statement ("I am glad you like pizza!") will only execute if
"pizza" is stored in `favorite_food` because it is tabbed over. But the second print statement will
execute no matter what because it is tabbed fully to the left. Because it is aligned with the `if`
statement, not inside of it, it doesn't "belong in" the `if` statement. In the second if statement,
both print statements will execute because both are tabbed inside the `if` statement. The third `if`
statement is actually an illegal statement because the two `print` statements are not tabbed the
same amount. Python cares about tabs and spaces, and they must be used correctly.

Conditionals can be complex with multiple alternatives. When an `if` is followed by an `elif`,
Python will treat this like saying, "if the previous condition is not true, then try this
condition". An `else` statement specifies what to do if none of the preceding `if` or `elif`
statements are `True`.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
elif favorite_food == "broccoli":
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

Note the important way the two examples below are different. In the first example, the first two
conditionals are an `if` and `elif`, and so they are mutually exclusive. Python checks to see if the
`if` is `True` first, and if it is, exits the conditional altogether without even checking to see if
the `elif` is `True`. So in this example, only "This is a lucky number!" will print. In the second
example, there are two `if` statements, so they are effectively independent, and the `else`
statement belongs to the second `if` statement. In this case, both "That is a lucky number!" and
"That is a single-digit positive number" print.

```python
favorite_number = 7
if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
elif 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")

if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
if 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")
```

## Embedded if-else Statements

Conditionals can be embedded inside each other. Just use the correct tabbing.

```python
name = "Jon"
text_response = "My favorite food is pizza and I hate broccoli."

if "pizza" in text_response:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon said something about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon said something about pizza.")
else:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
```

## Logical Operators and if-else Statements

Conditionals can also use logical operators to combine multiple comparisons (Boolean expressions;
see [Chapter 1.6](1.6.%20Operators.md)).

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"

if name == "Andrew" and favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Andrew's favorite food is pizza")
	# the line above will not execute because both comparisons were not True


if name == "Andrew" or favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Either the name is Andrew or the favorite food is pizza. Maybe both!")
	# the above statement will execute because at least one of the conditionals
	# is True

if name and favorite_food:
	print("Both the name and favorite food are truthy.")
else:
	print("One or more of the two values is falsy.")
```

## Short-hand if-else Statements (Ternary Operator)

Above, we noted that in a Python conditional, the code that will be executed if the condition is
`True` is usually on the next line, tabbed over. Python does allow you to do it all in one line:

```python
print("Yay pizza!") if favorite_food == "pizza" else print("Boo pizza!")
```

These "short-hand if" statements — aka, ternary expressions — are legal in Python, but they are
usually dispreferred as a convention because they make the code less readable and are harder to edit
if you end up needing to have multiple lines of code execute within the `if` or `else` block.

## The Pass statement

The final thing to note is that if-else statements cannot be empty; they must have code inside them.
The following code would get an error because nothing is tabbed inside the `if`:

```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:

print(a)
print(b)
```

However, if, for some reason, you need to have an empty `if` statement (or any other kind of
statement that requires a tabbed-over code), you can use the `pass` statement. The `pass` statement
is just a way of telling Python to do nothing if that conditional evaluates to `True`.

```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:
	pass

print(a)
print(b)

```

Pass statements are often useful as a way to temporarily get the code to run without an error if you
haven't figured out what you want to put inside the conditional.

## Exercise: Conditional Statements

For each of the following code blocks, predict what will be printed. Make your predictions before
running the code. Compare your predictions to the actual results — what did you get wrong? Can you
trace the logic to figure out why things turned out different than how you expected?

```python
# 1) Basic if statements
x = 5
if x > 3:
    print("x is greater than 3")
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 2) Branching logic
score = 85
if score >= 90:
    print("A")
elif score >= 80:
    print("B")
elif score >= 70:
    print("C")
else:
    print("F")

# 3) Nested if statements
name = "Everard"
age = 27
if name == "Everard":
    if age >= 18:
        print("Everard is an adult")
    else:
        print("Everard is a minor")
else:
    print("Not Everard")

# 4) Logical operators
x = 5
y = 10
if x > 3 and y < 15:
    print("Both conditions are true")
if x > 3 or y > 15:
    print("At least one condition is true")
if not (x > 3):
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 5) Ternary operator
age = 20
print("Adult") if age >= 18 else print("Minor")

# 6) Pass statement
x = 5
if x > 3:
    pass
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")
print("This will always print")

# 7) Complex nested conditions
score = 85
attendance = 0.75
if score >= 80:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Pass with good attendance")
    else:
        print("Pass but attendance needs improvement")
else:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Fail but good attendance")
    else:
        print("Fail and poor attendance")
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready</summary>

```python
# 1) Basic if-else
x = 5
if x > 3:
    print("x is greater than 3")  # This will print
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 2) Branching logic
score = 85
if score >= 90:
    print("A")
elif score >= 80:
    print("B")  # This will print
elif score >= 70:
    print("C")
else:
    print("F")

# 3) Nested if statements
name = "Everard"
age = 27
if name == "Everard":
    if age >= 18:
        print("Everard is an adult")  # This will print
    else:
        print("Everard is a minor")
else:
    print("Not Everard")

# 4) Logical operators
x = 5
y = 10
if x > 3 and y < 15:
    print("Both conditions are true")  # This will print
if x > 3 or y > 15:
    print("At least one condition is true")  # This will print
if not (x > 3):
    print("x is not greater than 3")

# 5) Ternary operator
age = 20
print("Adult") if age >= 18 else print("Minor")  # Will print "Adult"

# 6) Pass statement
x = 5
if x > 3:
    pass  # The pass statement does nothing
else:
    print("x is not greater than 3")
print("This will always print")  # This will print

# 7) Complex nested conditions
score = 85
attendance = 0.75
if score >= 80:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Pass with good attendance")
    else:
        print("Pass but attendance needs improvement")  # This will print
else:
    if attendance >= 0.8:
        print("Fail but good attendance")
    else:
        print("Fail and poor attendance")
```

</details>

Next: [1.8. Lab 1](1.8.%20Lab%201.md)<br>
Previous: [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)
