ebook/CH01/1.8. Lab 1.md, before:

# 1.8 Lab 1

```python
'''
This lab is a Python file and should run and execute like a Python file. Copy and paste the contents of this file into a new "lab_1.py" file of your own and make the necessary edits.
Your TA will grade the file by running it and reading your answers.
So please make sure that the file runs without getting an error and prints out the correct answers.

Some questions will be like question 1, asking you to explain something. Make sure your answer prints out when you run
the program.

Sometimes the question may ask you to modify or write some code that executes and perhaps to explain the code.

Make sure that the file you turn in runs without errors. If the script cannot run, your TA won't grade the assignment
and you will get a 0.
'''


"""
1) What is the difference between a variable, a statement, and an expression in Python?" Save your answer as a string
variable. Then create a print statement that prints out a "1) " and then prints your answer. The result should look
like this: "1) MY ANSWER HERE."
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 1) GOES HERE

"""
2) One of the lines below will generate an error when uncommented. Change that line and any other lines that you need
to so that the output of the print statement looks like this:

2) bcog bcog bcog

Please ensure that there are no additional spaces at the beginning or end of the output —
we will check for extra spaces!

You must use string multiplication, not just type bcog three times.

x = bcog
y = 5
z = x * y
print(z)
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 2) GOES HERE


"""
3) What is wrong with the following variable declarations:
	a) 1st_favorite_food = "pizza"
	b) Favorite_Food = pizza (2 problems)
	c) favfd = "pizza" (1 problem)

Create a print statement for your answer that looks like this:
3) Variable naming problems
	a) YOUR ANSWER
	b) YOUR ANSWER
	c) YOUR ANSWER

(There is no need to provide "corrected" code here -- I just want your explanation
for why the code as written doesn't work.)
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 3) GOES HERE


"""
4) The code below does not print out 20. Print out an explanation of why not, and change the code (while keeping the
multiplication) so that it does. Create a print statement that has your answer after a 4), and then print m with 20 as
the output.
"""
p = 5
q = '4'
m = p * q
print(m)


"""
5) What is an operator? Also, explain each kind of operator below and give an example. Create a print statement with
your answers that look like this:

| Operators   | DEFINITION |
| arithmetic  | DEFINITION |
| comparison  | DEFINITION |
| assignment  | DEFINITION |
| logical     | DEFINITION |
| identity    | DEFINITION |

The rows can take up multiple lines, but make sure the | symbols line up so it looks like a nicely formatted table.
Use string formatting to make everything line up.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 5) GOES HERE

"""
6) For each variable result1 through result5, create a print statement explaining what value will end up stored in
that variable. It should look like this:

	- result1 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result2 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result3 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result4 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result5 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION

"""
X = 0
Y = 1
A = '0'
B = 'dog'
C = ''
result1 = X or Y
result2 = X and Y
result3 = X or A
result4 = A and B
result5 = not A and B and C
print("6)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 6) GOES HERE


"""
7) For the string below, write code that does the following:
	- Capitalizes the first letter of each word and prints the result
	- Capitalizes the last letter of each word and prints the result
	- Uses the replace method to replace the word 'machines' with the word
		'animals', and prints the result
	- achieve the same result using string slicing and concatenation, and prints
		the result

We are not asking you to brute force this by manually editing the string! You should be able
to do this with string methods (or other methods we will learn about later).
"""
skinner = "the question is not whether machines think, but whether people do"
print("7)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 7) GOES HERE


"""
8) For the string below, write code that does the following:
	- use code (do not manually edit) the string so that it prints out with each
	  word on its own line, and print the result
	- without splitting the string, use code to print out how many words are in
	  the string
"""
descartes = "Thus having fully weighed every consideration, I must finally conclude that the statement \"I am, I exist\" must be true whenever I state it or mentally consider it."
print("8)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 8) GOES HERE



"""
9) Write code below that uses a conditional to print out either "Yes, the string is more than 50 characters,
it is X characters", where X is the length of the string, or prints out "No, the string is less than 50 characters,
it is X characters", or else prints out "The string is exactly 50 characters". The code should only end up printing
out the correct answer depending on the length of the string.
"""
chomsky = "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously."
print("9)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 9) GOES HERE


"""
10) In the following code, create a print statement that prints an explanation of why the output is what it is.
Then create a second print statement explaining what values you would need to change the variables to so that the
conditional printed out "else-if".

"""
x = 15
y = 40
z = -1
a = "cat"
b = "dog"
c = "egg"
if x > 20 and y != z:
	if a > b:
		print("if-if")
	elif b > c:
		print("if-elif")
	else:
		print("if-else")
else:
	if a > b:
		print("else-if")
	elif b > c:
		print("else-elif")
	else:
		print("else-else")
print("10)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 10) GOES HERE

```

Next: [2.0. For Loops](../CH02/2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)<br>
Previous: [1.7. Conditionals](1.7.%20Conditionals.md)

Commit message:

Update Lab 1 to disambiguate the header from the desired answers

ebook/CH01/1.8. Lab 1.md, after:

# 1.8 Lab 1

```python
'''
This lab is a Python file and should run and execute like a Python file. Copy and paste the contents of this file into a new "lab_1.py" file of your own and make the necessary edits.
Your TA will grade the file by running it and reading your answers.
So please make sure that the file runs without getting an error and prints out the correct answers.

Some questions will be like question 1, asking you to explain something. Make sure your answer prints out when you run
the program.

Sometimes the question may ask you to modify or write some code that executes and perhaps to explain the code.

Make sure that the file you turn in runs without errors. If the script cannot run, your TA won't grade the assignment
and you will get a 0.
'''


"""
1) What is the difference between a variable, a statement, and an expression in Python?" Save your answer as a string
variable. Then create a print statement that prints out a "1) " and then prints your answer. The result should look
like this: "1) MY ANSWER HERE."
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 1) GOES HERE

"""
2) One of the lines below will generate an error when uncommented. Change that line and any other lines that you need
to so that the output of the print statement looks like this:

2) bcog bcog bcog

Please ensure that there are no additional spaces at the beginning or end of the output —
we will check for extra spaces!

You must use string multiplication, not just type bcog three times.

x = bcog
y = 5
z = x * y
print(z)
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 2) GOES HERE


"""
3) What is wrong with the following variable declarations:
	a) 1st_favorite_food = "pizza"
	b) Favorite_Food = pizza (2 problems)
	c) favfd = "pizza" (1 problem)

Create a print statement for your answer that looks like this:
3) Variable naming problems
	a) YOUR ANSWER
	b) YOUR ANSWER
	c) YOUR ANSWER

(There is no need to provide "corrected" code here -- I just want your explanation
for why the code as written doesn't work.)
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 3) GOES HERE


"""
4) The code below does not print out 20. Print out an explanation of why not, and change the code (while keeping the
multiplication) so that it does. Create a print statement that has your answer after a 4), and then print m with 20 as
the output.
"""
p = 5
q = '4'
m = p * q
print(m)


"""
5) What is an operator? Also, explain each kind of operator below and give an example. Create a print statement with
your answers that look like this (the top row is the header; I'm not asking for a definition of "term" as well):

| Term        | Definition      |
| Operators   | YOUR_DEFINITION |
| arithmetic  | YOUR_DEFINITION |
| comparison  | YOUR_DEFINITION |
| assignment  | YOUR_DEFINITION |
| logical     | YOUR_DEFINITION |
| identity    | YOUR_DEFINITION |

The rows can take up multiple lines, but make sure the | symbols line up so it looks like a nicely formatted table.
Use string formatting to make everything line up.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 5) GOES HERE

"""
6) For each variable result1 through result5, create a print statement explaining what value will end up stored in
that variable. It should look like this:

	- result1 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result2 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result3 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result4 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION
	- result5 will be ANSWER because YOUR EXPLANATION

"""
X = 0
Y = 1
A = '0'
B = 'dog'
C = ''
result1 = X or Y
result2 = X and Y
result3 = X or A
result4 = A and B
result5 = not A and B and C
print("6)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 6) GOES HERE


"""
7) For the string below, write code that does the following:
	- Capitalizes the first letter of each word and prints the result
	- Capitalizes the last letter of each word and prints the result
	- Uses the replace method to replace the word 'machines' with the word
		'animals', and prints the result
	- achieve the same result using string slicing and concatenation, and prints
		the result

We are not asking you to brute force this by manually editing the string! You should be able
to do this with string methods (or other methods we will learn about later).
"""
skinner = "the question is not whether machines think, but whether people do"
print("7)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 7) GOES HERE


"""
8) For the string below, write code that does the following:
	- use code (do not manually edit) the string so that it prints out with each
	  word on its own line, and print the result
	- without splitting the string, use code to print out how many words are in
	  the string
"""
descartes = "Thus having fully weighed every consideration, I must finally conclude that the statement \"I am, I exist\" must be true whenever I state it or mentally consider it."
print("8)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 8) GOES HERE



"""
9) Write code below that uses a conditional to print out either "Yes, the string is more than 50 characters,
it is X characters", where X is the length of the string, or prints out "No, the string is less than 50 characters,
it is X characters", or else prints out "The string is exactly 50 characters". The code should only end up printing
out the correct answer depending on the length of the string.
"""
chomsky = "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously."
print("9)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 9) GOES HERE


"""
10) In the following code, create a print statement that prints an explanation of why the output is what it is.
Then create a second print statement explaining what values you would need to change the variables to so that the
conditional printed out "else-if".

"""
x = 15
y = 40
z = -1
a = "cat"
b = "dog"
c = "egg"
if x > 20 and y != z:
	if a > b:
		print("if-if")
	elif b > c:
		print("if-elif")
	else:
		print("if-else")
else:
	if a > b:
		print("else-if")
	elif b > c:
		print("else-elif")
	else:
		print("else-else")
print("10)")
# YOUR CODE FOR 10) GOES HERE

```

Next: [2.0. For Loops](../CH02/2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)<br>
Previous: [1.7. Conditionals](1.7.%20Conditionals.md)
