# 14.0. Data analysis and visualization

Python has two very popular modules for data analysis and visualization. The `pandas` module is a popular Python library
that helps users manipulate and analyze data. `matplotlib` is a module for creating plots and visualizing data. For
people who have used R, `pandas` and `matplotlib` replicate a lot of the functionality of R (except for building complex
statistical models, though there are other Python modules to do that).

## Installing `pandas` and `matplotlib`

Let's start with installation. Assuming that you followed the instructions all the way back in
[Chapter 0.4](../CH00/0.4.%20Installing%20Python.md), `matplotlib` and `pandas` are likely
installed. Even if they aren't, you can install them easily with `uv`. Go to your terminal window
(or command prompt on Windows) and enter the following command:

```bash
uv add pandas matplotlib
```

## Understanding `pandas`

The value of matplotlib is pretty obvious: making graphs and figures can be very useful. But what does `pandas` do? To
better understand the value of `pandas`, let's consider some common tasks researchers in cognitive science might
encounter and how `pandas` can help.

The main thing to know about pandas is that it gives us a new data structure to work with, the `DataFrame`. A `pandas`
`DataFrame` is a versatile, two-dimensional, tabular data structure. Some of its key features include the fact that both
rows and columns have labels. In such a DataFrame, each column is a pandas `Series`, which is a one-dimensional labeled
array capable of holding any data type, such as integers, floats, and strings. So what are its advantages?

- **Data Organization**: So far we have dealt with many datasets that we have had to store in matrices or lists of
  lists. `pandas` `DataFrames` give us many methods for inputting and organizing data, so we don't have to write the
  code to do it ourselves.
- **Data Cleaning**: Suppose a researcher is working with a dataset containing reaction times for participants in a
  study, but some reaction times are missing. `pandas` can be used to fill in those missing values with an average
  reaction time (aka data imputation) or remove the rows with missing information altogether, ensuring a clean dataset
  for further analysis.
- **Data Combining**: In another scenario, the researcher might have separate datasets with information about
  participants' demographics and their performance in a memory task. `pandas` makes it easy to merge these two datasets,
  connecting participants with their respective task results.
- **Data Filtering**: When it comes to filtering data, `pandas` is equally helpful. Imagine a dataset that includes
  details about participants, such as their age and scores in a cognitive test. The researcher can use `pandas` to
  extract data for participants who scored above a certain threshold while also being within a specific age range,
  allowing for more targeted analysis.
- **Data Summary**: Data summarization is another area where `pandas` shines. For instance, a dataset might include
  responses from multiple participants in a survey about learning strategies. The researcher can use pandas to group the
  data by strategy and calculate the average effectiveness rating for each learning technique.

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-START -->

Next: [14.1. Loading and Saving DataFrames](14.1.%20Loading%20and%20Saving%20DataFrames.md)<br>
Previous: [13.5. Lab 13](../CH13/13.0.%20Creating%20Experiments.md)

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-END -->
