# 3.0. Functions

The concept of a function is one of the most important in computer programming. A function is a block of code that only
runs when it is called. Functions often take input data (called parameters) and either execute some action (like
printing data to the screen or a file) or else return some kind of data back to where the function was called.

One of the main advantages of using functions in computer code is that when you have a certain block of code that you
will need to use many times, you can turn that code into a function. Then you can call that function over and over
instead of needing to retype and duplicate the code each time you want that code to run.

We've already used many functions (such as `print()` and `sum()`), and we can use them to illustrate the point. If you
have two lists of numbers like x = [1, 2, 3, 21, 32] and y = [51, 32, 1], you could write two different loops, one that
sums the first list and a second that sums the second list. To eliminate this need for redundant code for such a
commonly used operation, python has implemented the `sum()` function. Functions save a lot of time. There are many such
built-in functions, but in this chapter, we are going to focus on creating your own.

Functions have many advantages that should make you want to use them all the time. In addition to making it so you don't
have to rewrite code many times, functions make your code much more concise and well-organized. It also makes your code
much easier to debug. Imagine you have a block of code that you are re-using multiple times, and you discover there is a
mistake in it. If that code is in a function, you only have to make one change to the function. If, instead, you have
rewritten the code in several places, then you need to make the change in each one of those places.

In Python, functions are easy to create. Let's show a simple example.

```python
def print_favorite_food(name, favorite_food):
    print(f"Hello! {name}")
    print(f"Your favorite food is {favorite_food}!")

print_favorite_food("Jon", "pizza")

first_name = "Jessica"
food = "noodles"
print_favorite_food(first_name, food)
```

The code above creates the `print_favorite_food` function. The `print_favorite_food` function has two parameters, a
variable called `name` and a variable called `favorite_food`.

Functions, like `if` statements and loops, use indentation to denote what code "belongs to" the function. Each time the
function is called, the code inside the function executes. This is an important point; the code that you
put inside a function does _not_ execute until that function is used. The Python interpreter, when it sees a function
definition (a line that starts with `def`), makes note that the function exists and then effectively ignores all
further indented lines inside the function until the function is used. Then it goes back and executes those lines of
code.

## Passing variables into functions

Note that when the function is used, values need to be passed into the function that correspons to those in its
definition. They can be hard-coded values, as in the first example, or they can be variables that contain values, as in
the second example. Also note that if a variable is put into a function, it does not have to be named the same thing as
the variables defined inside the function. In fact, it is considered good programming practice to name variables inside
and outside a function with different names so that they don't get confused. But this is just a convention; unless the
variables are explicitly declared as a "global" variable, the variables inside a function are completely independent of
any outside of the function. We will discuss this issue more in later sections.

## Function naming rules and conventions

A final thing to consider regarding functions is the rules and conventions for how they should be named. Remember that
the rules MUST be followed; violating the rules will generate a syntax error. The rules for function names are pretty
simple:

- they must start with a `def`,
- have a space between `def` and the name
- have parentheses after the name (even if no parameters are defined for the function, you still put empty parentheses)
- end with a colon
- like all other rules for variable names in Python, they cannot start with a number or special character

One other thing to beware of is that you should be careful about using names that are already defined as functions in
python. This will not generate an error, but it will mean that you are redefining that word to do what your function
does from that point on, and the Python-predefined version of that function will no longer be available.

As far as conventions go, there are several conventions for Python functions (habits you should develop for naming
functions, even if they don't generate an error):

- name them like variables
  - using lowercase descriptive words that mean something
  - if you use more than one word, separate them by underscores (snake case)
- differentiate variable names and function names by using nouns for variables and verbs for functions. Remember that
  variables are objects, so noun names make sense. In contrast, the functions "do something", so it makes sense to use a
  verb as their name.

## Lambda functions

Lambda functions, also known as anonymous functions, are small, single-expression functions that can be created inline
without using the `def` keyword. They are useful when you need a simple function for a short period of time and don't
want to define a full function using `def`. Lambda functions can have any number of parameters but can only contain a
single expression, which is immediately returned.

Here's the basic syntax of a lambda function:

```python
lambda parameters: expression
```

Let's compare a regular function that adds two numbers to a lambda function that does the same thing:

```python
# Regular function
def add(x, y):
    return x + y

# Using the function
print(add(5, 3))  # Output: 8

# Lambda function -- this is the same as the regular function above
add = lambda x, y: x + y # notice that we don't use the `return` keyword! It's implicit.

# Using the lambda function
print(add(5, 3))  # Output: 8 -- the same as the regular function
```

Lambda functions are particularly useful when you need to pass a simple function as an argument to _another_ function. A
common use case is when sorting collections, or with list operations like `map()` and `filter()`:

```python
# Sorting a list of tuples by the second element
pairs = [(1, 'one'), (2, 'two'), (3, 'three'), (4, 'four')]
sorted_pairs = sorted(pairs, key=lambda pair: pair[1])
print(sorted_pairs)  # Output: [(4, 'four'), (1, 'one'), (3, 'three'), (2, 'two')]

# Using lambda with map() to square numbers
numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
squared = list(map(lambda x: x**2, numbers))
print(squared)  # Output: [1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
```

While lambda functions are convenient, they should be used sparingly. For more complex operations, it's better to use
regular functions defined with the `def` key word. Lambda functions are best suited for simple operations that can be
expressed in a single line of code.

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-START -->

Next: [3.1. Passing Arguments into Functions](3.1.%20Passing%20Arguments%20into%20Functions.md)<br>
Previous: [2.11. Lab 2](../CH02/2.11.%20Lab%202.md)

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-END -->
