ebook/CH03/3.3. Local and Global Variables.md, before:

# 3.3. Local and global variables

Now that we have introduced functions, we can talk a bit more about global versus local variables.

A really important concept in programming language is the difference between local and global variables. What these
terms mean is a difference in where a variable can be accessed. A global variable is one that can be accessed
anywhere in the program. A local variable is one that can only be accessed inside functions that have been
directly given access to that variable. This mainly comes into play with functions and classes (which we will learn
about later). Let's demonstrate with an example.

```python
def print_personal_info(first_name, favorite_food):
    print(f"{first_name}'s favorite food is {favorite_food}.")

name = "Jon"
food = "pizza"
print_personal_info(name, food)
```

The code above looks just like what we've dealt with so far. There are two variables defined and passed into the
function. But this code would work too:

```python
def print_personal_info():
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

name = "Jon"
food = "pizza"
print_personal_info()
```

Here, we don't pass the variables in at all. And yet the function still knows what is stored in the variables `name` and
`food`. What gives? The explanation is that `name` and `food` are global variables because they are defined outside any
function. Any variable that is created outside a function is a global variable that is accessible inside any function,
as long as that function doesn't have another variable inside of it declared with the same name.

In contrast, the following two examples would not work:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"

assign_personal_info()
print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")
```

The code above would give you an error. The variables `name` and `food` are declared inside the function, not at the global
level. This means that they are still technically undefined (at the global level) when they are used in the print
statement. This could be fixed by adding a `return` statement to the function and returning those two variables:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"
    return name, food

name, food = assign_personal_info()
print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")
```

This next bit of code would generate an error as well. It has the same problem. The variables `name` and `food` are
defined inside a function, and so are not global.

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"

def print_personal_info():
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

assign_personal_info()
print_personal_info()
```

If you want another function to have access to them, you would need to pass them to that function like this:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"
    return name, food

def print_personal_info(name, food):
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

name, food = assign_personal_info()
print_personal_info(name, food)
```

The first function returns the variables, and then they are passed into the next function.

## Why bother passing variables, instead of using global variables?

Passing variables between functions sounds like a pain. Why not just make every function a global function? There are
many reasons we don't want to do this.

The main reason is that we may have different functions that are all doing different things with the same variable; it
can be very hard to keep track of which ones are changing the value of the variable, which ones are using it, and if the
variable will be the value you expect it to be when it is used. Forcing variables to be passed around is a way to
enforce structure in the program. If you want to know exactly what a function does, you want to be able to know exactly
what the states of the variables are that the function is using. Global variables tend to make that a lot harder.

But remember what we said earlier about rules stating that there is a "right way to do something". There are no rules,
and this is true for global variables as well. The main principle is that you are trying to make your code clear and
simple. There are times when using a global variable is the easiest, or even the only, way to solve a problem. But
usually, global variables make programs harder to understand, and they should be avoided unless you have a good reason
for using them.

Next: [3.4. The `main()` function](<3.4.%20The%20main()%20Function.md>)<br>
Previous: [3.2. Functions](3.2.%20Return%20Values.md)

Commit message:

Update 3.3 with link to discussion on scoping issues in 8.8

ebook/CH03/3.3. Local and Global Variables.md, after:

# 3.3. Local and global variables

Now that we have introduced functions, we can talk a bit more about global versus local variables.

A really important concept in programming language is the difference between local and global variables. What these
terms mean is a difference in where a variable can be accessed. A global variable is one that can be accessed
anywhere in the program. A local variable is one that can only be accessed inside functions that have been
directly given access to that variable. This mainly comes into play with functions and classes (which we will learn
about later). Let's demonstrate with an example.

```python
def print_personal_info(first_name, favorite_food):
    print(f"{first_name}'s favorite food is {favorite_food}.")

name = "Jon"
food = "pizza"
print_personal_info(name, food)
```

The code above looks just like what we've dealt with so far. There are two variables defined and passed into the
function. But this code would work too:

```python
def print_personal_info():
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

name = "Jon"
food = "pizza"
print_personal_info()
```

Here, we don't pass the variables in at all. And yet the function still knows what is stored in the variables `name` and
`food`. What gives? The explanation is that `name` and `food` are global variables because they are defined outside any
function. Any variable that is created outside a function is a global variable that is accessible inside any function,
as long as that function doesn't have another variable inside of it declared with the same name.

In contrast, the following two examples would not work:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"

assign_personal_info()
print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")
```

The code above would give you an error. The variables `name` and `food` are declared inside the function, not at the global
level. This means that they are still technically undefined (at the global level) when they are used in the print
statement. This could be fixed by adding a `return` statement to the function and returning those two variables:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"
    return name, food

name, food = assign_personal_info()
print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")
```

This next bit of code would generate an error as well. It has the same problem. The variables `name` and `food` are
defined inside a function, and so are not global.

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"

def print_personal_info():
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

assign_personal_info()
print_personal_info()
```

If you want another function to have access to them, you would need to pass them to that function like this:

```python
def assign_personal_info():
    name = "Jon"
    food = "pizza"
    return name, food

def print_personal_info(name, food):
    print(f"{name}'s favorite food is {food}.")

name, food = assign_personal_info()
print_personal_info(name, food)
```

The first function returns the variables, and then they are passed into the next function.

## Why bother passing variables, instead of using global variables?

Passing variables between functions sounds like a pain. Why not just make every function a global function? There are
many reasons we don't want to do this.

The main reason is that we may have different functions that are all doing different things with the same variable; it
can be very hard to keep track of which ones are changing the value of the variable, which ones are using it, and if the
variable will be the value you expect it to be when it is used. Forcing variables to be passed around is a way to
enforce structure in the program. If you want to know exactly what a function does, you want to be able to know exactly
what the states of the variables are that the function is using. Global variables tend to make that a lot harder.

But remember what we said earlier about rules stating that there is a "right way to do something". There are no rules,
and this is true for global variables as well. The main principle is that you are trying to make your code clear and
simple. There are times when using a global variable is the easiest, or even the only, way to solve a problem. But
usually, global variables make programs harder to understand, and they should be avoided unless you have a good reason
for using them[^1].

Next: [3.4. The `main()` function](<3.4.%20The%20main()%20Function.md>)<br>
Previous: [3.2. Functions](3.2.%20Return%20Values.md)

[^1]:
    For more discussion on this topic, see [Chapter 8.8 Common Pitfalls](../CH08/8.8.%20Common%20Pitfalls.md) — in
    particular, the section on "Scoping issues".
