ebook/CH03/3.5. An Example Program.md, before:

# 3.5. An example program

In this section, we are going to create a simple Tkinter program that implements a little virus-spreading simulation.
What we are going to do is build a little game-like window that has little simulated "people" running around. In
computational modeling, we usually refer to the entities in such simulations as "artificial agents", or just "agents"
for short, and we call a simulation like this "agent-based modeling".

In the simulation, we want to implement the following functions

- A main function that defines our simulation parameters and calls the functions below
- Functions for the user interface of the simulation
  - Creating the main window
  - Creating the frame and canvas that will display the simulation
  - Creating the frame for the user interface buttons
    - A start/stop button that activates or pauses the simulation
    - A quit button that exits the simulation
- Functions for the simulation itself (which are all independent of the GUI)
  - A function to create the list of agents
  - A function to describe what happens at each time step in the simulation, which calls the following functions
    for each agent:
    - Move_agent, which moves each agent around the simulation display
    - Update agent, which updates the properties of the agent
      - Checking to see if the agent gets infected by nearby agents
      - If infected or immune, updates the infection and immunity counters

And that's it. Let's get started! The first thing I always recommend for a complex program like this is to outline it
above. Describe in English, not Python, what the program needs to do and what its structure will be. Then create a
skeleton program with the functions created but not implemented. Then you can fill in the code of the functions one by
one and test each one to make sure that it works as intended.

## Creating the main() function

Now let's create the main function and define our simulation parameters. You'll notice that, in addition to importing
tkinter, we import two other modules in this program: time and random. Time allows us to do some time-related stuff, and
random allows us to generate random numbers. As for the rest of the parameters, they are explained in the comments.

```python
import tkinter as tk
import time
import random

def main():
    WINDOW_DIMENSIONS = (1200, 800)  # this size of the overall window
    SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS = (1200, 700)  # the size of the simulation part of the window

    NUM_AGENTS = 100   # the number of agents in the simulation
    MOVEMENT_SPEED = 20   # how many pixes each agent will move in a single turn
    INFECTION_DISTANCE = 100   # how close two agents have to be to have a chance at infecting each other
    INFECTION_CHANCE = .5  # the probability agents will infect each other if within the distance
    INFECTION_DURATION = 20   # how many turns an agent stays infected (and contagious)
    IMMUNITY_DURATION = 30   # how many turns an agent is immune from infection after getting infected

    # the options above are bundled into a tuple, so we only need to pass one variable around
    OPTIONS = (NUM_AGENTS, MOVEMENT_SPEED, INFECTION_DISTANCE, INFECTION_CHANCE, INFECTION_DURATION, IMMUNITY_DURATION)

    agent_list = create_agent_list(SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS, OPTIONS)

    main_window = create_simulation_display(WINDOW_DIMENSIONS, SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS, agent_list, OPTIONS)
    main_window.mainloop()

running = False

```

That's it. We could, instead of creating the tkinter window, create a loop in that main function called the
`take_turn()` function (that we will create below) over and over. Then the simulation would run in a virtual fashion
(sometimes called "headless" mode) without a visual display. This can be useful when we want the simulation to run
quickly and we don't want to watch it. But if we want to watch it, we need to create a visual interface. So let's do
that next.

## Creating the simulation functions

Next, let's create the simulation functions one by one. Starting with `create_agent_list()`. Each agent in our simulation is
going to be its own list of five properties:

1. x-coordinate
2. y-coordinate
3. Agent size (in pixels)
4. Days of infection remaining (or zero if uninfected)
5. Days of immunity remaining (or zero if not immune)

We'll generate the x and y coordinates for each agent randomly, using the `random.randint()` function. This function
takes two numbers (`min` and `max`), and it will generate a number between those two, inclusive (i.e., the min and max
values can be one of the random numbers chosen).

We'll set the infection and immunity values to zero for all the agents except one, our patient zero. Hey, immunologists
start counting at zero, just like Python!

So we create a for loop that iterates num_agents amount of times (which we stored in options). We create our list of
properties for each agent and then add that list to the agent list. We then choose one of our agents to infect and set
their infection_duration and immunity_duration values to whatever we had set in the options in the `main()` function.
When we're done, we'll return the `agent_list`.

```python
def create_agent_list(dimensions, options):
    '''
    this function will create the agent_list.
    It will need to know the dimensions and the options
    It will need to return the agent_list back to the main program
    '''
    num_agents = options[0]
    infection_duration = options[4]
    immunity_duration = options[5]

    agent_size = 20
    agent_list = []

    for i in range(num_agents):
        x = random.randint(agent_size, dimensions[0]-agent_size)
        y = random.randint(agent_size, dimensions[1]-agent_size)
        agent = [x, y, agent_size, 0, 0]
        agent_list.append(agent)

    patient_zero_index = random.randint(0, num_agents-1)
    patient_zero = agent_list[patient_zero_index]
    patient_zero[3] = infection_duration
    patient_zero[4] = immunity_duration

    return agent_list
```

Next, let's make the `take_turn()` function, where all the action happens. But it's very simple. We just want to loop
through our list of agents and do two things: call the `move_agent()` function and the `update_agent()` function (which
updates each of the agent's infection and immunity values.)

```python
def take_turn(agent_list, dimensions, options):
    '''
    This function will specify what happens to each agent on each turn.
    It will need the agent list, the dimensions, and the options
    It will need to return the updated agent_list back to the main program
    '''
    for i in range(len(agent_list)):
        move_agent(agent_list[i], dimensions, options)
        update_agent(i, agent_list, options)

    return agent_list
```

Now let's create the move_agent function. This function is very simple. We are just going to randomly decide to move the
agent, by `movement_speed` pixels (one of our options from `main()`), in each of the x and y directions. Remember that
each agent is a list, and its x and y values are stored in the first two positions. So we are just calculating a new
position, x, and y, and checking to make sure those positions are not off the screen. If they are not, we change the
agent's position to that value. We could, obviously, make this function much more interesting and complicated by making
the agents move in less random ways. If you wanted, you could make some agents introverts that ran away from other
agents and others extroverts that ran toward other agents!

```python
def move_agent(agent, dimensions, options):
    '''
    this function will move the agent
    it needs the agent it moves, the dimensions, and the options
    it doesn't need to return anything. Remember, modifying the agent here will also modify it in the agent list
        because both are pointing to the same object in memory
    '''
    movement_speed = options[1]

    new_x = agent[0] + movement_speed * random.choice([-1, 1])
    if 0 < new_x < dimensions[0]:
        agent[0] = new_x

    new_y = agent[1] + movement_speed * random.choice([-1, 1])
    if 0 < new_y < dimensions[1]:
        agent[1] = new_y
```

Now let's make the code that updates the agents' infection and immunity values. The first two if statements check to see
if the agent is either infected or immune (a nonzero number for the number of turns left to be infected or immune), and
if nonzero, reduce that number by 1. Then we have a loop that loops through each agent to compare it to the current
agent. If the neighbor agent we are testing is not the current agent, and if the neighbor agent is infected, then we run
the check_spread_infection function. If it returns true, we set the infection and immunity values of the current agent
to the values specified in the options.

```python
def update_agent(agent_index, agent_list, options):
    '''
    this function will update the infection and immunity properties of the agent
    it needs to know which agent is currently being updated, the full agent list, and the options
    it doesn't need to return anything since it is dealing with reference to the agent_list and so changes here will
        be made globally
    '''
    if agent_list[agent_index][3] > 0:
        agent_list[agent_index][3] -= 1

    if agent_list[agent_index][4] > 0:
        agent_list[agent_index][4] -= 1

    for i in range(len(agent_list)):
        if i != agent_index:
            if agent_list[i][3] > 0:
                spread_infection = check_spread_infection(agent_list[agent_index], agent_list[i], options)
                if spread_infection:
                    agent_list[agent_index][3] = options[4]
                    agent_list[agent_index][4] = options[5]
```

Finally, we need to implement the check_spread_infection function. Here, we start by setting a boolean spread_infection
variable to False, and then check some conditions that might make us set it to True. If the agent is too close to the
sick_agent, and if we choose a random number less than the infection chance (i.e. if the infection chance is .2 when we
randomly select a float number between 0 and 1; if it is .2 or less (which has a probability of .2), then we will infect
the agent if the agent is not already infected and not currently immune.

```python
def check_spread_infection(agent, sick_agent, options):

    infection_distance = options[2]
    infection_chance = options[3]

    spread_infection = False

    distance = ((agent[0]-sick_agent[0])**2 + (agent[1]-sick_agent[1])**2)**0.5

    if distance < infection_distance:
        if random.random() < infection_chance:
            if agent[3] == 0:
                if agent[4] == 0:
                    spread_infection = True

    return spread_infection
```

That's it. That's the whole simulation. Now we just need to create the interface.

## Creating the GUI

Now let's make the `create_simulation_display()` function. In this function, we will create our `main_window` and give it
a title. Then we will compute our `button_frame` dimensions and call two more functions, one each for creating our
`simulation_frame` and our `button_frame`. Why are we putting each of these in their own function, besides that, it makes
the code more organized. Well, first off, that reason alone is a good reason. Better-organized code is easier to read,
understand, fix, and change. But the other big reason is that it helps us to force each step to be independent, and that
is a _really really_ good thing in computer programs. Making each function independent makes it so much easier to change
and fix things, especially if you decide you need to do the program slightly differently later.

```python
def create_simulation_display(app_dimensions, simulation_dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    This function will create our main window and call our create_simulation_frame and create_button_frame functions
    it needs to know the app dimensions, the size of the simulation_dimensions frame, and the agent_list and options
        (which eventually) needs to be passed along to the button which makes the simulation go
    '''

    main_window = tk.Tk()
    main_window.title("Pandemic!")

    # just like before, we calculate the size of one frame by subtracting it from the other
    button_frame_dimensions = (app_dimensions[0], app_dimensions[1]-simulation_dimensions[1])

    # next we create a sub-function to create each of our frames, passing them the information they will need
    simulation_canvas = create_simulation_frame(main_window, simulation_dimensions, agent_list)
    create_button_frame(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, button_frame_dimensions, agent_list, options)

    return main_window
```

Here's the code for our simulation frame. We create our frame and our canvas, and then we call the `draw_canvas()`
function, which we will create to draw all of our agents. Notice we had to pass in the `main_window` (so that we could
embed the frame in it), the dimensions (so we could set its size), and the agent_list (so we can pass that along to the
draw_canvas function).

```python
def create_simulation_frame(main_window, dimensions, agent_list):
    '''
    This function will create our simulation frame and canvas and then call the draw canvas function, which will draw
        all of our agents on the canvas
    it needs to know the size of the simulation_dimensions frame and have access to the main_window (so it can put the
        simulation frame there) and have access to the agent_list so that it can pass that info along to the draw_canvas
        function
    it needs to return the canvas object back to the create_simulation_display function so that the canvas can be updated
        when the start button is pressed.
    '''
    simulation_frame = tk.Frame(main_window, width=dimensions[0], height=dimensions[1])
    simulation_frame.pack()

    simulation_canvas = tk.Canvas(simulation_frame, width=dimensions[0], height=dimensions[1], bg="black")
    simulation_canvas.pack()

    draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list)

    return simulation_canvas
```

Now let's create the `draw_canvas` function. This function will be called every time we change the state of the
simulation (i.e., any property of any of the agents), and we want to visualize the change. It will get called at the
very beginning and then every step of our simulation loop. So every time it gets called, we are effectively going to
wipe it clean and redraw it using whatever information is stored in the `agent_list`. We just want to cycle through the
agent list and draw each one at the correct coordinates and in the correct color: red for the infected, green for the
immune, and yellow for everyone else.

```python
def draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list):
    '''
    This function will draw each of our agents on the screen in an appropriate color
    it needs to access the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, and the list of agents.
    '''

    # first, delete everything in the canvas. Remember, this step happens virtually, so you don't actually see it happen
    #   nothing is updated on the canvas itself until main_window.update() is called.
    simulation_canvas.delete("all")

    # go through each agent in the list
    for agent in agent_list:
        # if the agent is infected, set their color to red
        if agent[3] > 0:
            color = "red"
        else:
            # if the agent is currently immune, set their color to green
            if agent[4] > 0:
                color = "green"
            # if the agent is neither infected nor immune, set their color to yellow
            else:
                color = "yellow"

        # draw the agent as a colored rectangle in the appropriate position. Remember that agent is a list of data, its
        #    first two items are its x,y coordinates, and its third item is its size, so these can be used to specify
        #    the four points of each rectangle
        simulation_canvas.create_rectangle(agent[0], agent[1], agent[0] + agent[2], agent[1] + agent[2],
                                           fill=color, outline="white")

    # update the main window forcing the data to show on the screen
    main_window.update()
```

Now let's create the button frame. There is one big difference here from what you've seen before. Remember how when we
define a button, we've assigned a function to its `command` parameter, stating what function will be executed when the
button is pressed? You may have noticed something special about those functions: they don't have parentheses that allow
us to pass arguments. But what if we want to pass arguments? In that case we have to use a special bit of syntax like we
did below for the start_button. We have to put "lambda: " before the function name. But then we can use a function like
we normally would.

```python
def create_button_frame(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, button_frame_dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    this function will draw each of our agents on the screen in an appropriate color
    it needs to access to the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, and the list of agents.
    '''

    button_frame = tk.Frame(main_window, width=button_frame_dimensions[0], height=button_frame_dimensions[1])
    button_frame.pack()

    start_button = tk.Button(button_frame, text="Start/Stop", command=lambda: start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, agent_list, options))
    start_button.pack(side=tk.LEFT)

    quit_button = tk.Button(button_frame, text="Quit", command=main_window.destroy)
    quit_button.pack(side=tk.LEFT)

    return button_frame
```

Ok, now all we have to do is code that `start_stop()` function.

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    This function specifies what happens when the start/stop button is pushed
    it needs to access the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, the dimensions, the agent-list, and
    options so they can be passed along to the take_turn function in our simulation
    '''

    # make running a global variable so that it is always the same every time we access this function
    global running

    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    if running:
        running = False
    else:
        running = True

    # if the running variable is True, then call the take_turn function and redraw the canvas.
    # the time.sleep() function forces a 100 ms pause between each step of this loop. Without this, it runs almost too fast
    #   to observe.
    while running:
        agent_list = take_turn(agent_list, dimensions, options)
        draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list)
        time.sleep(.1)
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```
That's it. That's the whole program. If you copy these functions over to your own file, you should be able to run the 
simulation (and you will need to, for the lab...).

Next: [3.6. Lab 3](3.6.%20Lab%203.md)<br>
Previous: [3.4. The main() Function](3.4%20The%20main()%20Function.md)

Commit message:

Add bonus exercise to 3.6 about toggling booleans

ebook/CH03/3.5. An Example Program.md, after:

# 3.5. An example program

In this section, we are going to create a simple Tkinter program that implements a little virus-spreading simulation.
What we are going to do is build a little game-like window that has little simulated "people" running around. In
computational modeling, we usually refer to the entities in such simulations as "artificial agents", or just "agents"
for short, and we call a simulation like this "agent-based modeling".

In the simulation, we want to implement the following functions

- A main function that defines our simulation parameters and calls the functions below
- Functions for the user interface of the simulation
  - Creating the main window
  - Creating the frame and canvas that will display the simulation
  - Creating the frame for the user interface buttons
    - A start/stop button that activates or pauses the simulation
    - A quit button that exits the simulation
- Functions for the simulation itself (which are all independent of the GUI)
  - A function to create the list of agents
  - A function to describe what happens at each time step in the simulation, which calls the following functions
    for each agent:
    - Move_agent, which moves each agent around the simulation display
    - Update agent, which updates the properties of the agent
      - Checking to see if the agent gets infected by nearby agents
      - If infected or immune, updates the infection and immunity counters

And that's it. Let's get started! The first thing I always recommend for a complex program like this is to outline it
above. Describe in English, not Python, what the program needs to do and what its structure will be. Then create a
skeleton program with the functions created but not implemented. Then you can fill in the code of the functions one by
one and test each one to make sure that it works as intended.

## Creating the main() function

Now let's create the main function and define our simulation parameters. You'll notice that, in addition to importing
tkinter, we import two other modules in this program: time and random. Time allows us to do some time-related stuff, and
random allows us to generate random numbers. As for the rest of the parameters, they are explained in the comments.

```python
import tkinter as tk
import time
import random

def main():
    WINDOW_DIMENSIONS = (1200, 800)  # this size of the overall window
    SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS = (1200, 700)  # the size of the simulation part of the window

    NUM_AGENTS = 100   # the number of agents in the simulation
    MOVEMENT_SPEED = 20   # how many pixes each agent will move in a single turn
    INFECTION_DISTANCE = 100   # how close two agents have to be to have a chance at infecting each other
    INFECTION_CHANCE = .5  # the probability agents will infect each other if within the distance
    INFECTION_DURATION = 20   # how many turns an agent stays infected (and contagious)
    IMMUNITY_DURATION = 30   # how many turns an agent is immune from infection after getting infected

    # the options above are bundled into a tuple, so we only need to pass one variable around
    OPTIONS = (NUM_AGENTS, MOVEMENT_SPEED, INFECTION_DISTANCE, INFECTION_CHANCE, INFECTION_DURATION, IMMUNITY_DURATION)

    agent_list = create_agent_list(SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS, OPTIONS)

    main_window = create_simulation_display(WINDOW_DIMENSIONS, SIMULATION_DIMENSIONS, agent_list, OPTIONS)
    main_window.mainloop()

running = False

```

That's it. We could, instead of creating the tkinter window, create a loop in that main function called the
`take_turn()` function (that we will create below) over and over. Then the simulation would run in a virtual fashion
(sometimes called "headless" mode) without a visual display. This can be useful when we want the simulation to run
quickly and we don't want to watch it. But if we want to watch it, we need to create a visual interface. So let's do
that next.

## Creating the simulation functions

Next, let's create the simulation functions one by one. Starting with `create_agent_list()`. Each agent in our simulation is
going to be its own list of five properties:

1. x-coordinate
2. y-coordinate
3. Agent size (in pixels)
4. Days of infection remaining (or zero if uninfected)
5. Days of immunity remaining (or zero if not immune)

We'll generate the x and y coordinates for each agent randomly, using the `random.randint()` function. This function
takes two numbers (`min` and `max`), and it will generate a number between those two, inclusive (i.e., the min and max
values can be one of the random numbers chosen).

We'll set the infection and immunity values to zero for all the agents except one, our patient zero. Hey, immunologists
start counting at zero, just like Python!

So we create a for loop that iterates num_agents amount of times (which we stored in options). We create our list of
properties for each agent and then add that list to the agent list. We then choose one of our agents to infect and set
their infection_duration and immunity_duration values to whatever we had set in the options in the `main()` function.
When we're done, we'll return the `agent_list`.

```python
def create_agent_list(dimensions, options):
    '''
    this function will create the agent_list.
    It will need to know the dimensions and the options
    It will need to return the agent_list back to the main program
    '''
    num_agents = options[0]
    infection_duration = options[4]
    immunity_duration = options[5]

    agent_size = 20
    agent_list = []

    for i in range(num_agents):
        x = random.randint(agent_size, dimensions[0]-agent_size)
        y = random.randint(agent_size, dimensions[1]-agent_size)
        agent = [x, y, agent_size, 0, 0]
        agent_list.append(agent)

    patient_zero_index = random.randint(0, num_agents-1)
    patient_zero = agent_list[patient_zero_index]
    patient_zero[3] = infection_duration
    patient_zero[4] = immunity_duration

    return agent_list
```

Next, let's make the `take_turn()` function, where all the action happens. But it's very simple. We just want to loop
through our list of agents and do two things: call the `move_agent()` function and the `update_agent()` function (which
updates each of the agent's infection and immunity values.)

```python
def take_turn(agent_list, dimensions, options):
    '''
    This function will specify what happens to each agent on each turn.
    It will need the agent list, the dimensions, and the options
    It will need to return the updated agent_list back to the main program
    '''
    for i in range(len(agent_list)):
        move_agent(agent_list[i], dimensions, options)
        update_agent(i, agent_list, options)

    return agent_list
```

Now let's create the move_agent function. This function is very simple. We are just going to randomly decide to move the
agent, by `movement_speed` pixels (one of our options from `main()`), in each of the x and y directions. Remember that
each agent is a list, and its x and y values are stored in the first two positions. So we are just calculating a new
position, x, and y, and checking to make sure those positions are not off the screen. If they are not, we change the
agent's position to that value. We could, obviously, make this function much more interesting and complicated by making
the agents move in less random ways. If you wanted, you could make some agents introverts that ran away from other
agents and others extroverts that ran toward other agents!

```python
def move_agent(agent, dimensions, options):
    '''
    this function will move the agent
    it needs the agent it moves, the dimensions, and the options
    it doesn't need to return anything. Remember, modifying the agent here will also modify it in the agent list
        because both are pointing to the same object in memory
    '''
    movement_speed = options[1]

    new_x = agent[0] + movement_speed * random.choice([-1, 1])
    if 0 < new_x < dimensions[0]:
        agent[0] = new_x

    new_y = agent[1] + movement_speed * random.choice([-1, 1])
    if 0 < new_y < dimensions[1]:
        agent[1] = new_y
```

Now let's make the code that updates the agents' infection and immunity values. The first two if statements check to see
if the agent is either infected or immune (a nonzero number for the number of turns left to be infected or immune), and
if nonzero, reduce that number by 1. Then we have a loop that loops through each agent to compare it to the current
agent. If the neighbor agent we are testing is not the current agent, and if the neighbor agent is infected, then we run
the check_spread_infection function. If it returns true, we set the infection and immunity values of the current agent
to the values specified in the options.

```python
def update_agent(agent_index, agent_list, options):
    '''
    this function will update the infection and immunity properties of the agent
    it needs to know which agent is currently being updated, the full agent list, and the options
    it doesn't need to return anything since it is dealing with reference to the agent_list and so changes here will
        be made globally
    '''
    if agent_list[agent_index][3] > 0:
        agent_list[agent_index][3] -= 1

    if agent_list[agent_index][4] > 0:
        agent_list[agent_index][4] -= 1

    for i in range(len(agent_list)):
        if i != agent_index:
            if agent_list[i][3] > 0:
                spread_infection = check_spread_infection(agent_list[agent_index], agent_list[i], options)
                if spread_infection:
                    agent_list[agent_index][3] = options[4]
                    agent_list[agent_index][4] = options[5]
```

Finally, we need to implement the check_spread_infection function. Here, we start by setting a boolean spread_infection
variable to False, and then check some conditions that might make us set it to True. If the agent is too close to the
sick_agent, and if we choose a random number less than the infection chance (i.e. if the infection chance is .2 when we
randomly select a float number between 0 and 1; if it is .2 or less (which has a probability of .2), then we will infect
the agent if the agent is not already infected and not currently immune.

```python
def check_spread_infection(agent, sick_agent, options):

    infection_distance = options[2]
    infection_chance = options[3]

    spread_infection = False

    distance = ((agent[0]-sick_agent[0])**2 + (agent[1]-sick_agent[1])**2)**0.5

    if distance < infection_distance:
        if random.random() < infection_chance:
            if agent[3] == 0:
                if agent[4] == 0:
                    spread_infection = True

    return spread_infection
```

That's it. That's the whole simulation. Now we just need to create the interface.

## Creating the GUI

Now let's make the `create_simulation_display()` function. In this function, we will create our `main_window` and give it
a title. Then we will compute our `button_frame` dimensions and call two more functions, one each for creating our
`simulation_frame` and our `button_frame`. Why are we putting each of these in their own function, besides that, it makes
the code more organized. Well, first off, that reason alone is a good reason. Better-organized code is easier to read,
understand, fix, and change. But the other big reason is that it helps us to force each step to be independent, and that
is a _really really_ good thing in computer programs. Making each function independent makes it so much easier to change
and fix things, especially if you decide you need to do the program slightly differently later.

```python
def create_simulation_display(app_dimensions, simulation_dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    This function will create our main window and call our create_simulation_frame and create_button_frame functions
    it needs to know the app dimensions, the size of the simulation_dimensions frame, and the agent_list and options
        (which eventually) needs to be passed along to the button which makes the simulation go
    '''

    main_window = tk.Tk()
    main_window.title("Pandemic!")

    # just like before, we calculate the size of one frame by subtracting it from the other
    button_frame_dimensions = (app_dimensions[0], app_dimensions[1]-simulation_dimensions[1])

    # next we create a sub-function to create each of our frames, passing them the information they will need
    simulation_canvas = create_simulation_frame(main_window, simulation_dimensions, agent_list)
    create_button_frame(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, button_frame_dimensions, agent_list, options)

    return main_window
```

Here's the code for our simulation frame. We create our frame and our canvas, and then we call the `draw_canvas()`
function, which we will create to draw all of our agents. Notice we had to pass in the `main_window` (so that we could
embed the frame in it), the dimensions (so we could set its size), and the agent_list (so we can pass that along to the
draw_canvas function).

```python
def create_simulation_frame(main_window, dimensions, agent_list):
    '''
    This function will create our simulation frame and canvas and then call the draw canvas function, which will draw
        all of our agents on the canvas
    it needs to know the size of the simulation_dimensions frame and have access to the main_window (so it can put the
        simulation frame there) and have access to the agent_list so that it can pass that info along to the draw_canvas
        function
    it needs to return the canvas object back to the create_simulation_display function so that the canvas can be updated
        when the start button is pressed.
    '''
    simulation_frame = tk.Frame(main_window, width=dimensions[0], height=dimensions[1])
    simulation_frame.pack()

    simulation_canvas = tk.Canvas(simulation_frame, width=dimensions[0], height=dimensions[1], bg="black")
    simulation_canvas.pack()

    draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list)

    return simulation_canvas
```

Now let's create the `draw_canvas` function. This function will be called every time we change the state of the
simulation (i.e., any property of any of the agents), and we want to visualize the change. It will get called at the
very beginning and then every step of our simulation loop. So every time it gets called, we are effectively going to
wipe it clean and redraw it using whatever information is stored in the `agent_list`. We just want to cycle through the
agent list and draw each one at the correct coordinates and in the correct color: red for the infected, green for the
immune, and yellow for everyone else.

```python
def draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list):
    '''
    This function will draw each of our agents on the screen in an appropriate color
    it needs to access the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, and the list of agents.
    '''

    # first, delete everything in the canvas. Remember, this step happens virtually, so you don't actually see it happen
    #   nothing is updated on the canvas itself until main_window.update() is called.
    simulation_canvas.delete("all")

    # go through each agent in the list
    for agent in agent_list:
        # if the agent is infected, set their color to red
        if agent[3] > 0:
            color = "red"
        else:
            # if the agent is currently immune, set their color to green
            if agent[4] > 0:
                color = "green"
            # if the agent is neither infected nor immune, set their color to yellow
            else:
                color = "yellow"

        # draw the agent as a colored rectangle in the appropriate position. Remember that agent is a list of data, its
        #    first two items are its x,y coordinates, and its third item is its size, so these can be used to specify
        #    the four points of each rectangle
        simulation_canvas.create_rectangle(agent[0], agent[1], agent[0] + agent[2], agent[1] + agent[2],
                                           fill=color, outline="white")

    # update the main window forcing the data to show on the screen
    main_window.update()
```

Now let's create the button frame. There is one big difference here from what you've seen before. Remember how when we
define a button, we've assigned a function to its `command` parameter, stating what function will be executed when the
button is pressed? You may have noticed something special about those functions: they don't have parentheses that allow
us to pass arguments. But what if we want to pass arguments? In that case we have to use a special bit of syntax like we
did below for the start_button. We have to put "lambda: " before the function name. But then we can use a function like
we normally would.

```python
def create_button_frame(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, button_frame_dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    this function will draw each of our agents on the screen in an appropriate color
    it needs to access to the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, and the list of agents.
    '''

    button_frame = tk.Frame(main_window, width=button_frame_dimensions[0], height=button_frame_dimensions[1])
    button_frame.pack()

    start_button = tk.Button(button_frame, text="Start/Stop", command=lambda: start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, simulation_dimensions, agent_list, options))
    start_button.pack(side=tk.LEFT)

    quit_button = tk.Button(button_frame, text="Quit", command=main_window.destroy)
    quit_button.pack(side=tk.LEFT)

    return button_frame
```

Ok, now all we have to do is code that `start_stop()` function.

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    '''
    This function specifies what happens when the start/stop button is pushed
    it needs to access the main_window (so it can force it to update), the canvas, the dimensions, the agent-list, and
    options so they can be passed along to the take_turn function in our simulation
    '''

    # make running a global variable so that it is always the same every time we access this function
    global running

    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    if running:
        running = False
    else:
        running = True

    # if the running variable is True, then call the take_turn function and redraw the canvas.
    # the time.sleep() function forces a 100 ms pause between each step of this loop. Without this, it runs almost too fast
    #   to observe.
    while running:
        agent_list = take_turn(agent_list, dimensions, options)
        draw_canvas(main_window, simulation_canvas, agent_list)
        time.sleep(.1)
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

> [!TIP] Bonus exercise
>
> Can you think of another way to toggle the state of the running variable? There is a way to do it without using `if` or even `else`,
> using concepts you've already learned. Try to figure it out!

That's it. That's the whole program. If you copy these functions over to your own file, you should be able to run the
simulation (and you will need to, for the lab...).

Next: [3.6. Lab 3](3.6.%20Lab%203.md)<br>
Previous: [3.4. The main() Function](<3.4%20The%20main()%20Function.md>)
