# 3.7. Homework 3

In this assignment, you are going to write a Python program that administers a short personality test (the extroversion
questions from the Big Five personality test). The test will be administered in the terminal window, and it will
conclude by printing out the person's extroversion score. There are ten questions, and the user answers each
question with a number 1 through 5. The numbers mean:

1. Strongly disagree
2. Somewhat disagree
3. Neither agree nor disagree
4. Somewhat agree
5. Strongly agree

Some questions are `positive` questions for that dimension, like "I am the life of the party"; we want
their score (1-5) on positive questions to add to their total extroversion score. Other questions, like "I don't
talk a lot," are `negative` questions; we want their score (1-5) on negative questions to subtract from their total
extroversion score.

The ten questions are shown below, formatted as a comma-separated (.csv) file

```csv
I am the life of the party.,1
I don't talk a lot.,-1
I feel comfortable around people.,1
I keep in the background.,-1
I start conversations.,1
I have little to say.,-1
I talk to a lot of different people at parties.,1
I don't like to draw attention to myself.,-1
I don't mind being the center of attention.,1
I am quiet around strangers.,-1
```

Note that each row has two values separated by a comma:

1. the question
2. whether the question is a positive question or a negative question

Create a .csv file called "extroversion_questions.csv", copy and paste that question data in, and
save it.

Create a .txt file called "instructions.txt" and type instructions for the user explaining how to
take the survey into it. The instructions you write should be clear and concise.

Next, create a script called "survey.py". In it, write a function-based program that satisfies the
following requirements:

- Create and call a main function that calls all the functions described below:

- Create a function called `load_questions` that
  - Takes the file name of the question csv file as an input
  - Creates a list of tuples called `question_tuple_list`
  - Reads in the file and stores the data in `question_tuple_list`
    i.e. [("q1", 1), ("q2", -1), ("q3", 1), ..., ("q10", 1)]
    - Note: the likes of ("q1", 1) are _placeholders_ here representing the values stored in the
      "extroversion_questions.csv" file that you need to create and load. We are not asking that you
      write "q1", "q2", etc. in your code. Load the actual questions and values from the file.
  - Returns `question_tuple_list` back to the main function

- Create a function called `print_instructions` that
  - Takes in the name of the instructions text file as an input
  - Reads in the instructions and stores them in the variable `instructions`
  - Prints the instructions to the screen

- Create a function called `administer_survey` that
  - Takes the question_tuple_list as an input
  - Creates a list called `answer_list`
  - Uses a for-loop to cycle through the question tuple list, and each time:
    - Calls the function "ask_question", passing it the question
    - Gets back a valid_response, and saves it to the `answer_list`
    - Return the `answer_list` back to the main function

- Create a function called `ask_question` that
  - Takes the question as an input
  - Uses a while-loop to
    - Print the question to the screen
    - Get a response from the user
    - Check to make sure the response is valid (i.e. it is a number between 1 and 5)
    - Informs the user of an invalid response
    - Repeats the loop while the response is not valid
  - Once a valid response is obtained, return the response back to the main function
- Create a function called `calculate_score` that
  - Takes the `question_tuple_list` and `answer_list` as inputs
  - Computes the `extroversion_score` by summing each answer times its +1/-1 value
  - Computes the `maximum_extroversion_score` (the highest score someone could have gotten)
    - Note: we are asking you to _compute_ the maximum score, and not just hard code it. In
      addition, the maximum score is **not** 50.
  - Returns `extroversion_score` and `maximum_extroversion_score` to the main function

- Create a function called `output_score` that
  - Takes `extroversion_score` and `maximum_extroversion_score` as inputs
  - Prints out a sentence telling them their score out of the max possible using `.format()` or f-strings.

Submit your three files (extroversion_questions.csv, instructions.txt, and survey.py) to complete
the assignment.

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-START -->

Next: [4.0. Sets](../CH04/4.0.%20Sets.md)<br>
Previous: [3.6. Lab 4](3.6.%20Lab%203.md)

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-END -->
