# 2.0. For Loops

In programming languages, a `for` loop is used to repeatedly execute a sequence of code a specified number of times. In
Python, the way this works is that when you type a `for` loop command, you must also specify some kind of sequence. The
`for` loop uses that sequence to know how many times to loop, executing a number of times that matches the length of the
sequence. In the example below, we use the only sequence we've focused on so far, strings, as an example.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
for letter in favorite_food:
    print(letter)
```

The syntax of a `for` loop in Python has four elements:

1. `for`
2. a variable (or set of variables) used to hold each element in the sequence ("letter" in the example above) — this is
   also called an _iterable_, and usually (but not always!) takes the form of a _collection_ (e.g., a string, list, set,
   or dictionary)
3. `in`
4. the sequence being iterated over (the string "pizza" in the example above)

Here's another example. Imagine we want to convert all the vowels in a string to upper case, without
changing the other letters. Think through what we would need to do logically. We'd need to go
through each letter in the string one at a time, check to see if it is a vowel, and convert it to
upper case if it is. There are many ways one could accomplish this, but if we want to use a for a
loop, we can start like this:

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."

for letter in hebb_quote:
    pass
```

Remember that `pass` is a Python command we can use to tell a block of code to do nothing, and it can be useful to fill
it in while we consider what we want to do. So what do we need to do inside the for loop? We need to check each letter
to see if it is a vowel. How can we do that?

Recall that we can check whether a character is "in" a string by using the `in` keyword from Section 1.6. (You may
also recall from Section 1.3 that `.find()` returns the numeric position of a character in a string,
or `-1` if it isn't found, but here it would be cleaner to use `in` instead.) With this knowledge,
we can now accomplish our goal: 

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."
vowels = 'aeiou'

for letter in hebb_quote:
    is_vowel = letter in vowels
    if is_vowel:
        letter = letter.upper()
    print(letter)
```

In the code above, the first line after the `for` statement searches for the current letter in the
`vowels` string and sets `is_vowel` to `True` if it finds `letter` in that string; it sets
`is_vowel` to `False` if it doesn't find it. Next, we have a simple `if` statement that sets what is
stored in `letter` to an upper case version of the same letter if it is a vowel, and leaves it alone
otherwise. Next, we print out the letter. As written, this would create output that looked like
this:

```txt
c
E
l
l
s

A
c
t
I
v
E
```

But what if we want this?

```txt
cElls ActIvE tOgEthEr wIll tEnd tO bEcOmE AssOcIAtEd; ActIvIty In OnE fAcIlItAtEs ActIvIty In thE OthEr.
```

If we first create an empty string (using two quotes with nothing between them, not even a space),
then we can do some simple string concatenation inside the loop, adding each letter one at a time to
the new string, in either upper or lower case as appropriate:

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."
vowels = 'aeiou'
new_hebb_quote = ""  # this is an empty string, since it is just two quotes with nothing between them

for letter in hebb_quote:
    if letter in vowels:
        new_hebb_quote += letter.upper()
    else:
        new_hebb_quote += letter
    print(new_hebb_quote)
```

> [!NOTE]
>
> ### A more Pythonic approach?
>
> If you are already somewhat familiar with Python, you may be thinking that we could have done this in a more
> idiomatic (aka Pythonic) way. I promise we will get to that later; for now, we are focusing on the basics.

## Exercise: For Loops (with Strings + Conditionals)

For each of the following code blocks, predict what will be printed. Make your predictions before
running the code. Compare your predictions to the actual results you observe when you run the code —
what, if anything, did you get wrong? Can you trace the loop logic to figure out why?

```python
# A
s = "neuron"
i = 0
for char in s:
    if i % 2 == 0:
        print(char)
    else:
        print(char.upper())
    i += 1


# B
s = "cells, that fire"
n = 0
for char in s:
    if char != " " and char != ",":
        n += 1
print(n)


# C
s = "AaEeIiOoUu!"
t = ""
for char in s:
    if char.lower() in "aeiou":
        t += "*"
    else:
        t += char
print(t)


# D
s = "synapse"
vowels = "aeiou"
t = ""
for char in s:
    if char in vowels:
        t = t + char
    else:
        t = char + t
print(t)


# E
s = "cOgSci"
pos = None
i = 0
for char in s:
    if pos is None and char.isupper():
        pos = i
    i += 1
print(pos)
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready to check your answers</summary>

```python
# A
# Output:
# n
# E
# u
# R
# o
# N


# B
# Output:
# 13


# C
# Output:
# **********!


# D
# Output:
# spnysae


# E
# Output:
# 1
```

</details>

Next: [2.1. Range and Enumerate](2.1.%20Range%20and%20Enumerate.md)
Previous: [1.8. Lab 1](../CH01/1.8.%20Lab%201.md)
