ebook/CH02/2.1. Range and Enumerate.md, before:

# 2.1. `range()` and `enumerate()`

In addition to strings, Python has many other types of sequences that can be used as iterators for
loops: these include lists, tuples, dictionaries, and sets. We will cover how to use a `for` loop to
iterate over these sequences when we learn about those data types.

> [!NOTE] On Iterators (Advanced/Optional)
> You can think of an iterator as a collection of values that you can traverse one at a time. More concretely, an iterator is an object that implements the `__iter__()` and `__next__()` methods. The `__iter__()` method returns the iterator object itself, and the `__next__()` method returns the next value in the sequence, raising a `StopIteration` exception when the sequence is exhausted.

For now, there are two other kinds of sequences we want to introduce.

## The `range()` Function

The `range()` function gives you an object that is a sequence of numbers in a given range.

```python
x = range(5)
y = len(x)
print(x)  # result is range(0, 5), which can also be thought of as the sequence: 0,1,2,3,4
print(y)  # result would be 5, the length of the sequence
```

The code above creates a range object and stores it in the variable `x`. If you print `x`, you will
see that it contains two pieces of information: the number that starts the sequence and the number
that ends the sequence. This end number can be a bit confusing at first. It is not the last number
in the sequence, but the number _after_ the last number. A `range` object's ending number works just
like the number we used to end a string slice in the previous section. The final number is the
stopping point, **but is not actually one of the numbers in the sequence**. This means that
`range(5)` is actually the sequence `(0, 1, 2, 3, 4)` — notice that 5 is not in there! One way to
think about it is that the number entered into the range function is the length of the sequence (5),
and it starts at 0, so it must end at 4. You can verify the size of the sequence in `range()` data
type by using `len()` as was done above.

The `range()` function is useful if you want to specify a loop to run a specific number of times.
The _loop_ below sums all of the numbers from 1 to x. So if we want to sum the numbers 1 to 5, then
we need the loop to run 5 times. So we just need a `range` object that is 5 elements long.

```python
# code that sums all the numbers from 1 to x, in this case x = 5, and so the sum = 1+2+3+4+5 = 15
x = 5
the_sum = 0
for i in range(x):
    the_sum += i + 1
print(the_sum)  # the result would be 15
```

When a range object is created, there are actually three arguments (pieces of information the
function uses to create the object1):

1. the starting point of the sequence (which defaults to 0 if it is not specified)
2. the stopping point of the sequence (the number we entered and which must be entered)
3. the step size (or increment size, which defaults to 1 if it is not specified)

So when we typed `range(5)`, that was actually the same as if we had typed `range(0, 5, 1)`. It's
just that the 0 and 1 are the default. But if, for some reason, you want to specify a more complex
range with different starting points, or different step sizes, you can. Say you wanted to sum all
odd numbers from 1 to 21 (so 1, 3, 5, etc.):

```python
the_sum = 0
for i in range(1, 22, 2): # go from 1 to 22 (but not including 22) in steps of 2
    the_sum += i
print(the_sum)  # the result is 1+3+5+7+9+11+13+15+17+19+21=132
```

## The `enumerate()` Function

If we use a `for` loop to iterate over a string, we get each element in the string one at a time. If
we iterate using the `range()` function, we get a counter variable at each iteration, and we could
use that as an index to access a sequence like a list. This gives us two different ways we can
iterate through a sequence and also have a index variable that keeps track of where we are in the
sequence:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

index = 0
for letter in favorite_food:
    print(index, letter)
    index += 1

for index in range(len(favorite_food)):
    print(index, favorite_food[index])
```

Both of these produce the same output:

```text
0 p
1 i
2 z
3 z
4 a
```

Both also, however, require us to do some extra work. In the first example, we have to create an
index variable and increment it each pass through the list. In the second example, the loop does
this for us, but then we have to use the loop's index variable to access the letter in the string.
These both work fine, and this pattern is common in many programming languages. However, Python
gives us an automatic way to do both at the same time: the `enumerate()` function. `enumerate()`
must be given a sequence just like the `range()` function, but it automatically gives us an object
that contains both the individual elements of the sequence and the index.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
for index, letter in enumerate(favorite_food):
    print(index, letter)
```

Next: [2.2. While Loops](2.2.%20While%20Loops.md)<br>
Previous: [2.0. For Loops](2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)

Commit message:

2.1 — Add a note on using the sum function

ebook/CH02/2.1. Range and Enumerate.md, after:

# 2.1. `range()` and `enumerate()`

In addition to strings, Python has many other types of sequences that can be used as iterators for
loops: these include lists, tuples, dictionaries, and sets. We will cover how to use a `for` loop to
iterate over these sequences when we learn about those data types.

> [!NOTE] On Iterators (Advanced/Optional)
> You can think of an iterator as a collection of values that you can traverse one at a time. More concretely, an iterator is an object that implements the `__iter__()` and `__next__()` methods. The `__iter__()` method returns the iterator object itself, and the `__next__()` method returns the next value in the sequence, raising a `StopIteration` exception when the sequence is exhausted.

For now, there are two other kinds of sequences we want to introduce.

## The `range()` Function

The `range()` function gives you an object that is a sequence of numbers in a given range.

```python
x = range(5)
y = len(x)
print(x)  # result is range(0, 5), which can also be thought of as the sequence: 0,1,2,3,4
print(y)  # result would be 5, the length of the sequence
```

The code above creates a range object and stores it in the variable `x`. If you print `x`, you will
see that it contains two pieces of information: the number that starts the sequence and the number
that ends the sequence. This end number can be a bit confusing at first. It is not the last number
in the sequence, but the number _after_ the last number. A `range` object's ending number works just
like the number we used to end a string slice in the previous section. The final number is the
stopping point, **but is not actually one of the numbers in the sequence**. This means that
`range(5)` is actually the sequence `(0, 1, 2, 3, 4)` — notice that 5 is not in there! One way to
think about it is that the number entered into the range function is the length of the sequence (5),
and it starts at 0, so it must end at 4. You can verify the size of the sequence in `range()` data
type by using `len()` as was done above.

The `range()` function is useful if you want to specify a loop to run a specific number of times.
The _loop_ below sums all of the numbers from 1 to x. So if we want to sum the numbers 1 to 5, then
we need the loop to run 5 times. So we just need a `range` object that is 5 elements long.

```python
# code that sums all the numbers from 1 to x, in this case x = 5, and so the sum = 1+2+3+4+5 = 15
x = 5
the_sum = 0
for i in range(x):
    the_sum += i + 1
print(the_sum)  # the result would be 15
```

When a range object is created, there are actually three arguments (pieces of information the
function uses to create the object1):

1. the starting point of the sequence (which defaults to 0 if it is not specified)
2. the stopping point of the sequence (the number we entered and which must be entered)
3. the step size (or increment size, which defaults to 1 if it is not specified)

So when we typed `range(5)`, that was actually the same as if we had typed `range(0, 5, 1)`. It's
just that the 0 and 1 are the default. But if, for some reason, you want to specify a more complex
range with different starting points, or different step sizes, you can. Say you wanted to sum all
odd numbers from 1 to 21 (so 1, 3, 5, etc.):

```python
the_sum = 0
for i in range(1, 22, 2): # go from 1 to 22 (but not including 22) in steps of 2
    the_sum += i
print(the_sum)  # the result is 1+3+5+7+9+11+13+15+17+19+21=132
```

> [!TIP] Summing a sequence of numbers 
> The above example shows how to sum a sequence of numbers from first principles using a `for` loop.
> However, in practice you should actually use the built-in `sum()` function instead, like so:
> `sum(range(1, 22, 2))` This is more concise, declarative, and computationally efficient.

## The `enumerate()` Function

If we use a `for` loop to iterate over a string, we get each element in the string one at a time. If
we iterate using the `range()` function, we get a counter variable at each iteration, and we could
use that as an index to access a sequence like a list. This gives us two different ways we can
iterate through a sequence and also have a index variable that keeps track of where we are in the
sequence:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

index = 0
for letter in favorite_food:
    print(index, letter)
    index += 1

for index in range(len(favorite_food)):
    print(index, favorite_food[index])
```

Both of these produce the same output:

```text
0 p
1 i
2 z
3 z
4 a
```

Both also, however, require us to do some extra work. In the first example, we have to create an
index variable and increment it each pass through the list. In the second example, the loop does
this for us, but then we have to use the loop's index variable to access the letter in the string.
These both work fine, and this pattern is common in many programming languages. However, Python
gives us an automatic way to do both at the same time: the `enumerate()` function. `enumerate()`
must be given a sequence just like the `range()` function, but it automatically gives us an object
that contains both the individual elements of the sequence and the index.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
for index, letter in enumerate(favorite_food):
    print(index, letter)
```

Next: [2.2. While Loops](2.2.%20While%20Loops.md)<br>
Previous: [2.0. For Loops](2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)
