ebook/CH02/2.10. Lab 2.md, before:

# 2.10. Lab 2

```python
"""
This lab is a Python file and should run and execute like a Python file.
Your TA will grade the file by running it and reading your answers.
So please make sure that the file runs without getting an error and prints out the correct answers.

Some questions will be like question 1, asking you to explain something. Make sure your answer prints out when you run
the program.

Sometimes the question may ask you to modify or write some code that executes and perhaps to explain the code.

Make sure that the file you turn in runs without errors. If the script cannot run, your TA won't grade the assignment
and you will get a 0.
"""

print("\n########## Question 1 ##########\n")
"""
1) What is the difference between a for loop and a while loop? Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 1) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 2 ##########\n")
"""
2) Explain the following code. Then explain how it would behave differently if you changed continue to break.
    Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
the_sum = 0
i = 0
while i < 10:
    i += 1
    if i % 2 != 0:
        continue
    the_sum += i
print(the_sum)
# YOUR CODE FOR 2) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 3 ##########\n")
"""
3) What is an "infinite" while loop, and why does it happen?
    Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 3) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 4 ##########\n")
"""
Split the string below into a list of tokens (in this context, a list of words).
Then use two for loops (one embedded in the other) to loop over the list of tokens,
and within each token, loop over the characters and print them out
so that it looks like the output below. Your output should look like this
(but for all the words, not just two; I've added ellipses to show that the output should continue.)
Note that there should be a blank line between each word. Make sure not to add an extra blank line
at the end!

    T
    h
    e

    u
    n
    e
    x
    a
    m
    i
    n
    e
    d
    .
    .
    .
"""
socrates = "The unexamined life is not worth living"
# YOUR CODE FOR 4) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 5 ##########\n")
"""
5) The reading for this week described three ways to use a for loop iterate over a sequence:
    - getting an element of the sequence each iteration through the loop
    - getting an index counter each iteration through the loop
    - getting both at the same time

    Below, create a tuple of strings of your five favorite foods, and then iterate through the tuple using each of these methods,
    each time printing out a counter showing how many times you have iterated and the food at that
    place in the tuple. The output should look like the following (but with *your* favorite foods, not mine):

    Method 1:
    0 chicken vindaloo
    1 espresso ice cream
    2 lasagna
    3 tiramisu
    4 ramen

    Method 2:
    0 chicken vindaloo
    ...

    And so on for each method. The above should print out a total of three times:
    once for each method. Don't forget to start counting at 0.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 5) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 6 ##########\n")
"""
6) In the code below, "giraffe" is added to list2 but not to list1. But nonetheless, "giraffe" is found in list1.
    Explain why this happens using a print statement.
"""
list1 = ["dog", "cat", "mouse"]
list2 = list1
list2.append("giraffe")
if "giraffe" in list1:
    print("Found giraffe!")
else:
    print("Didn't find giraffe!")
# YOUR CODE FOR 6) GOES HERE



print("\n########## Question 7 ##########\n")
"""
7) In the string below:
    - use list methods to split the string into a list of tokens (sequences of characters separated by spaces).
    - then, loop through that list and, for each token, if it contains a "d", add it to d_list.
    - print d_list
    - print out how many characters were in the string, how many tokens were in the string, and how many tokens
        had a d. You must use code to get these numbers, not count them yourself. Your output should look like:
        ['mind', 'furnished', 'ideas']
        Characters: 52   Tokens: 9   d-Tokens: 3
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 7) GOES HERE
locke = "The mind is furnished with ideas by experience alone"
d_list = []



print("\n########## Question 8 ##########\n")
"""
8) For the following two strings, combine the strings and then output a descending-order list of each word and how frequently it occurred in
    both strings. But before using code to count these numbers, lowercase all characters and remove all punctuation (commas and periods).
    For this problem, you must use only loops, if-else statements, and string and list methods we have learned in class so far.
    No dict() or set() allowed!
    If the starting strings had been the following, your output should look like this:
    string1 = "The dog watched the cat."
    string2 = "The cat chased the mouse.
    Output:
    the, 4
    cat, 2
    dog, 1
    mouse, 1
    watched, 1
    chased, 1
"""
descartes1 = "If you would be a real seeker after truth, it is necessary that at least once in your life you doubt, as far as possible, all things"
descartes2 = "I think, therefore I am."
# YOUR CODE FOR 8) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 9 ##########\n")
"""
9) Below are two lists. Turn it into a single list, with each element in the list being a tuple containing one
element from each list, keeping them matched in order. Then print the resulting list. The output should look like this:
[("a", 0), ("e", 4), ("d", 3), ("b", 1), ("c", 2)]
"""
letter_list = ["a", "e", "d", "b", "c"]
number_list = [0, 4, 3, 1, 2]
# YOUR CODE FOR 9) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 10 ##########\n")
"""
10) Repeat what you did in the previous question, except this time, sort both lists. The output should look like this:
[("a", 0), ("b", 1), ("c", 2), ("d", 3), ("e", 4)]

"""
letter_list = ["a", "e", "d", "b", "c"]
number_list = [0, 4, 3, 1, 2]
# YOUR CODE FOR 10) GOES HERE

```

Next: [3.0. Functions](../CH03/3.0%20Functions.md)<br>
Previous: [2.9. File Input and Output](2.9.%20File%20Input%20and%20Output.md)

Commit message:

Update 2.10 question 10 so that sorting separately is no longer an option

ebook/CH02/2.10. Lab 2.md, after:

# 2.10. Lab 2

```python
"""
This lab is a Python file and should run and execute like a Python file.
Your TA will grade the file by running it and reading your answers.
So please make sure that the file runs without getting an error and prints out the correct answers.

Some questions will be like question 1, asking you to explain something. Make sure your answer prints out when you run
the program.

Sometimes the question may ask you to modify or write some code that executes and perhaps to explain the code.

Make sure that the file you turn in runs without errors. If the script cannot run, your TA won't grade the assignment
and you will get a 0.
"""

print("\n########## Question 1 ##########\n")
"""
1) What is the difference between a for loop and a while loop? Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 1) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 2 ##########\n")
"""
2) Explain the following code. Then explain how it would behave differently if you changed continue to break.
    Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
the_sum = 0
i = 0
while i < 10:
    i += 1
    if i % 2 != 0:
        continue
    the_sum += i
print(the_sum)
# YOUR CODE FOR 2) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 3 ##########\n")
"""
3) What is an "infinite" while loop, and why does it happen?
    Output your answer using a print statement.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 3) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 4 ##########\n")
"""
Split the string below into a list of tokens (in this context, a list of words).
Then use two for loops (one embedded in the other) to loop over the list of tokens,
and within each token, loop over the characters and print them out
so that it looks like the output below. Your output should look like this
(but for all the words, not just two; I've added ellipses to show that the output should continue.)
Note that there should be a blank line between each word. Make sure not to add an extra blank line
at the end!

    T
    h
    e

    u
    n
    e
    x
    a
    m
    i
    n
    e
    d
    .
    .
    .
"""
socrates = "The unexamined life is not worth living"
# YOUR CODE FOR 4) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 5 ##########\n")
"""
5) The reading for this week described three ways to use a for loop iterate over a sequence:
    - getting an element of the sequence each iteration through the loop
    - getting an index counter each iteration through the loop
    - getting both at the same time

    Below, create a tuple of strings of your five favorite foods, and then iterate through the tuple using each of these methods,
    each time printing out a counter showing how many times you have iterated and the food at that
    place in the tuple. The output should look like the following (but with *your* favorite foods, not mine):

    Method 1:
    0 chicken vindaloo
    1 espresso ice cream
    2 lasagna
    3 tiramisu
    4 ramen

    Method 2:
    0 chicken vindaloo
    ...

    And so on for each method. The above should print out a total of three times:
    once for each method. Don't forget to start counting at 0.
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 5) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 6 ##########\n")
"""
6) In the code below, "giraffe" is added to list2 but not to list1. But nonetheless, "giraffe" is found in list1.
    Explain why this happens using a print statement.
"""
list1 = ["dog", "cat", "mouse"]
list2 = list1
list2.append("giraffe")
if "giraffe" in list1:
    print("Found giraffe!")
else:
    print("Didn't find giraffe!")
# YOUR CODE FOR 6) GOES HERE



print("\n########## Question 7 ##########\n")
"""
7) In the string below:
    - use list methods to split the string into a list of tokens (sequences of characters separated by spaces).
    - then, loop through that list and, for each token, if it contains a "d", add it to d_list.
    - print d_list
    - print out how many characters were in the string, how many tokens were in the string, and how many tokens
        had a d. You must use code to get these numbers, not count them yourself. Your output should look like:
        ['mind', 'furnished', 'ideas']
        Characters: 52   Tokens: 9   d-Tokens: 3
"""
# YOUR CODE FOR 7) GOES HERE
locke = "The mind is furnished with ideas by experience alone"
d_list = []



print("\n########## Question 8 ##########\n")
"""
8) For the following two strings, combine the strings and then output a descending-order list of each word and how frequently it occurred in
    both strings. But before using code to count these numbers, lowercase all characters and remove all punctuation (commas and periods).
    For this problem, you must use only loops, if-else statements, and string and list methods we have learned in class so far.
    No dict() or set() allowed!
    If the starting strings had been the following, your output should look like this:
    string1 = "The dog watched the cat."
    string2 = "The cat chased the mouse.
    Output:
    the, 4
    cat, 2
    dog, 1
    mouse, 1
    watched, 1
    chased, 1
"""
descartes1 = "If you would be a real seeker after truth, it is necessary that at least once in your life you doubt, as far as possible, all things"
descartes2 = "I think, therefore I am."
# YOUR CODE FOR 8) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 9 ##########\n")
"""
9) Below are two lists. Turn it into a single list, with each element in the list being a tuple containing one
element from each list, keeping them matched in order. Then print the resulting list. The output should look like this:
[("a", 0), ("e", 4), ("d", 3), ("b", 1), ("c", 2)]
"""
letter_list = ["a", "e", "d", "b", "c"]
number_list = [0, 4, 3, 1, 2]
# YOUR CODE FOR 9) GOES HERE


print("\n########## Question 10 ##########\n")
"""
10) Using the same lists as above, first `zip` them together into tuples, then sort the resulting list of tuples 
based on either the letter or number in each tuple (your choice). The output should look like this:
[("a", 0), ("b", 1), ("c", 2), ("d", 3), ("e", 4)]

Note: Do not sort the original lists separately — you must sort the combined tuples!
"""
letter_list = ["a", "e", "d", "b", "c"]
number_list = [0, 4, 3, 1, 2]
# YOUR CODE FOR 10) GOES HERE

```

Next: [3.0. Functions](../CH03/3.0%20Functions.md)<br>
Previous: [2.9. File Input and Output](2.9.%20File%20Input%20and%20Output.md)
