# 2.2. While Loops

Loops are blocks of code that iterate for a specified number of times (the length of the iterator object that is
specified in the `for` loop). In contrast, a `while` loop is a loop that iterates continuously while certain conditions are
true. The example below is a `while` loop that will iterate until `x` reaches a certain value.

```python
x = 0

while x < 5:
    print(x)
    x += 1
```

In the example above, there is not really a difference between a `while` loop and a `for` loop. The
`while` loop is necessarily going to iterate 5 times, and so a `for` loop that iterates over a range
of 5 (or a collection of 5 elements) would do the same thing. But there are many cases where we want
code to continue doing something until a condition is reached — something other than just iterating
over the whole sequence. Most of the obvious examples involve lists, which we will go over in the
next section. But we can give a simple example with a string. Imagine we want to go through a
sequence of numbers but stop when their sum reaches a certain value:

```python
number_sequence_string = "161272346154"
sequence_sum = 0
stop_value = 30
i = 0

while sequence_sum < stop_value:
    sequence_sum += int(number_sequence_string[i])
    i += 1
    print(i, sequence_sum)
```

The result of the code above is:

```text
1 1
2 7
3 8
4 10
5 17
6 19
7 22
8 26
9 32
```

Now, you might spot a potential problem with the logic above. What happens if the sum never gets
over 30? What if, for example, the sequence was "0000010100". In this case, I would eventually reach
10 and try to access location 10 in the string, but there is no location 10 (the string's length is
10, so the last spot is 9). This would cause the program to throw an error. But you could protect
against that problem with a slightly more complex `while` statement:

```python
number_sequence_string = "0000010100"
sequence_sum = 0
stop_value = 30
i = 0
sequence_length = len(number_sequence_string)

while (sequence_sum < stop_value) and (i < sequence_length - 1):
    print(i, sequence_sum, sequence_sum < stop_value, i < sequence_length - 1)
    sequence_sum += int(number_sequence_string[i])
    i += 1
```

With the output:

```text
0 0 True True
1 0 True True
2 0 True True
3 0 True True
4 0 True True
5 0 True True
6 1 True True
7 1 True True
8 2 True True
```

This time, in the `while` loop, we have two conditions and require them both to be `True` for the `while` loop to continue.
For clarity, we also printed out both inside the `while` loop.

> [!TIP]
> ## VERY IMPORTANT ADVICE 
> Make use of ubiquitous `print` statements to see the values of your variables. It will help you
> detect errors, and make sure your code is doing what it is supposed to be doing. When you become
> more advanced along your journey, you will be able to do more sophisticated debugging and logging,
> but `print` statements will remain your best friend, potentially indefinitely.

## Infinite While Loops

Another risk of `while` loops is that you could create a situation where they run an infinite number
of times because the stop condition is never reached:

```python
x = 1

while x > 0:
    print(x)
    x += 1
```

If you were to run the previous example (**_PLEASE DO NOT RUN IT_**), it would freeze your terminal
application because the loop would never end. The variable `x` starts greater than 1 and just keeps
getting bigger. If this happens, you will get the spinning frozen icon on your computer, and your
only recourse will be to force quit the terminal application (using
<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>Option</kbd>+<kbd>Escape</kbd> on a Mac, or
<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>Delete</kbd> on Windows.) If this happens, it is not a serious
problem, but you will need to restart the terminal and go back to the folder and all that. In the
next section, we will show you a handy way you can catch and exit from an infinite `while` loop
within your program so you don't have to force quit the terminal.

## Exercise: While Loops

For each of the following code blocks, predict what will be printed. Make your predictions before
running the code. Compare your predictions to the actual results you observe when you run the code —
what, if anything, did you get wrong? Can you trace the logic of the code to figure out why?

```python
# A
i = 0
out = ""
while i < 5:
    out += str(i)
    i += 2
    print(out)


# B
s = "161272346154"
total = 0
i = 0
while total < 12 and i < len(s):
    total += int(s[i])
    i += 1
    print(i, total)


# C
s = "abcd"
i = 0
out = ""
while i < len(s) - 1:
    out = s[i] + out
    i += 1
    print(out)


# D
done = False
i = 0
total = 0
while not done:
    total += i
    if total > 3:
        done = True
    i += 1
    print(i, total, done)


# E
x = 8
while x > 0:
    if x % 3 == 0:
        x -= 2
    else:
        x -= 3
    print(x)
```

<details>
<summary>Exercise Solution — expand only when you're ready to check your answers</summary>

```text
# A
0
02
024

# B
1 1
2 7
3 8
4 10
5 17

# C
a
ba
cba

# D
1 0 False
2 1 False
3 3 False
4 6 True

# E
5
2
-1
```

</details>

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-START -->

Next: [2.3. Continue and Break](2.3.%20Continue%20and%20Break.md)<br>
Previous: [2.1. Range and Enumerate](2.1.%20Range%20and%20Enumerate.md)

<!-- GITHUB-NAV-END -->
