# 2.3. `continue` and `break`

The Python commands `continue` and `break` are two ways to exert control over loops.

The `continue` command allows you to skip the current iteration of the loop and move on to the next iteration. The
`break` command can be used to exit the loop altogether. A common use case of `continue` and `break` is at the beginning
of a loop to check for special conditions that make you not want to be in the loop anymore.

For example, here's how we can use `continue` in a `for` loop:

```python
increment_amount = 2
for i in range(0, 10, increment_amount):
    if i == 5:
        continue
    print(i)
```

This code prints every number from 0 to 9 in steps of 2, except 5. So, in this case, 0,2,4,6,8. With `increment_amount`
set to 2, 5 would not have been in the `range` object, so it wouldn't have printed regardless. But if `increment_amount`
were 1 or 5, it would be in the `range` object and would be skipped. When Python sees the `continue` statement, it
immediately stops the current iteration of the loop and goes on to the next one, skipping all other code in the loop.

Here is an example of `break`, this time in a `while` loop:

```python
x = 0
increment_amount = 1
while x < 100:
    if x < 0:
        break
    print(x)
    x += increment_amount
```

The code above prints every number from 0 to 99 in increments of whatever `increment_amount` is set to. If that is 1 it
will be 0,1,2,3,4,...99. If it is 10, it will be 0,10,20,30,...,90. But what happens if `increment_amount` is set to a
negative number? Then we would have an infinite while loop because `x` would never become > 100. The `if` statement
checks to see if `x` goes negative and exits the loop if it does, avoiding the infinite loop.

Now, you might wonder why do it that way instead of:

```python
x = 0
increment_amount = 1
while (x < 100) and (increment_amount > 0):
    print(x)
    x += increment_amount
```

In the situation above, both blocks of code work the same way. Some people do argue that most cases of `continue` and
`break` can be solved in other ways and are better solved in other ways. But there are times when they really are the
easiest way to solve a problem, so it is good to know they exist.

But whether you use a `break` statement or add an extra condition to a `while` loop definition, it can be a useful way
to check for an infinite loop:

```python
while_loop_counter = 0
while_loop_max = 1000000

while i < 100:
    print(i)
    while_loop_counter += 1
    if while_loop_counter > while_loop_max:
        print(f"WARNING: while loop iterated {while_loop_max} times without ending")
        break

while (i < 100) and (while_loop_counter < while_loop_max):
    print(i)
    while_loop_counter += 1
    if while_loop_counter > while_loop_max:
        print(f"WARNING: while loop iterated {while_loop_max} times without ending")
        break
```

The while loops above never change `i`, the variable is used to decide when the while loops should end, so they will
loop forever. If you are someone who worries about infinite while loops, you can get in the habit of always adding a
`counter` and `max` variable to every while loop you create to catch infinite loops. You can use this trick either with
a `break` statement as in the first example or just including it in a condition in the while loop declaration.

### Using sentinel values

Sometimes we intentionally want to create an infinite loop, but only until some condition is met. We can accomplish this
using a _sentinel value_. A sentinel value is a special value used to indicate the termination of a loop when a specific
condition is met. Unlike a loop with a predefined number of iterations (such as `for i in range(n):`), a loop using a
sentinel value continues running until it encounters a specific value that signals it should stop. This is particularly
useful when processing user input, reading files, making games, or any scenario where it isn't clear how many iterations
you'll need in advance.

#### Handling user input

Imagine that we are writing a program that sums numbers that the user inputs. The program will repeatedly ask the user
for a number and sum them all up. However, the user can enter `-1` to indicate they are done with entering numbers. So,
in this case we use `-1` as the sentinel value:

```python
running_total = 0 # the current sum of the numbers entered
while True:
    try:
        user_input = int(input("Enter a number (-1 to quit): "))
        if user_input == -1:
            break  # Sentinel value detected, exit loop
        running_total += user_input
    except ValueError:
        print("Please enter an integer.")
print(f"Total sum: {running_total}")
```

Here, the loop continues presumably until the user enters `-1`, at which point the `break` statement is executed,
terminating the loop. (The program also makes sure that the user enters an integer, otherwise it will print an error
message and ask the user to enter an integer again.)

#### Reading files

A common use case for sentinel values is when reading data from a file. Suppose we are processing a file where each line
contains data, and a special marker (such as the word `END`) signals the end of relevant data:

```python
with open("data.txt", "r") as file:
    for line in file:
        line = line.strip()
        if line == "END":
            break  # Stop processing when the sentinel value is found
        print(f"Processing: {line}")
```

Here, the loop iterates through the file line by line and stops when it encounters the sentinel value `"END"`.

#### Boolean sentinels

Despite its utility, I actually don't like using `break` statements. Instead, I find _boolean sentinels_ to be more
expressive and easier to work with. For example, we can create a boolean variable, `keep_going`, to control the loop
flow from our first example of reading user input:

```python
running_total = 0 # the current sum of the numbers entered
keep_going = True
while keep_going:
    try:
        user_input = int(input("Enter a number (-1 to quit): "))
        if user_input == -1:
            keep_going = False  # Sentinel value detected, exit loop!
        else:
            running_total += user_input
    except ValueError:
        print("Please enter an integer.")

print(f"Total sum: {running_total}")
```

Here, `keep_going` is initially `True`, allowing the loop to run. When the user enters `-1`, `keep_going` is set to
`False`, naturally ending the loop without using `break`. However, note that in this case, we had to put the
`running_total += user_input` statement inside of a new `else` block to ensure that the loop doesn't actually add `-1`
to the running total.

I like this approach because it makes the loop logic more explicit and easier to reason through, but using `break`
statements is also a fine way to handle such cases.

Next: [2.4. Lists](2.4.%20Lists.md)<br>
Previous: [2.2. While Loops](2.2.%20While%20Loops.md)
