ebook/CH02/2.5. List Methods.md, before:

# 2.5. List methods

## List methods

Like the other data types (`str`, `int`, `float`, etc.), lists are an object, which means they have functions (called
methods) that is a built-in part of the list and that you can call using the `.method_name()` procedure. For example:

```python
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

list1.append(31)  # adds a single item to the end of a list: list1 = list2 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23, 31]

list1.clear()  # removes all items from a list, resulting in an empty list: list1 = []

# let's recreate list1
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]
list2 = list1.copy()  # creates a copy of the list: list2 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

x = list1.count(23)  #  tells you how many times a particular element occurs in a list: x = 2

list2 = ['dog', 'cat']
list1.extend(list2) # concatenates a list onto the end of a list: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 23, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']

x = list1.index(23)  # tells you the first index where the element is found: x = 2. will cause error if not in list

list1.insert(2, 34)  # inserts a 34 in the 3rd position, moving others back: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 23, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']

x = list1.pop(3)  # removes element at specified position: x = 23, list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']
x = list1.pop()  # default for pop, if not specified, is -1, the last element in the list: x = 'cat', list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 23, 'dog']

list1.remove(23)  # removes the first occurrence of the specified value from the list: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 'dog']

# again, let's start over with the original list
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

list1.reverse()  # reversed the order of the list: list1 = [23, 77, 23, 65, 1]

list1.sort()  #  sorts the list. list1 = [1, 23, 23, 65, 77]
list1.sort(reverse=True)  # sorts a list in largest to smallest order: list1 = [77, 65, 23, 23, 1]

# let's change the list up a bit
list1 = [1, 6, 3, "dog", "cat"]
list1.sort()  #  ERROR: you can't sort a list that mixes different types of data
```

## List copying: Python list assignments are copies by reference!

You may have noticed that one of the methods for a list is `.copy()`. Why is this necessary? Can't we make a copy by doing
the following?

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1
```

That works for strings, ints, floats, and booleans — in some other languages, this would work fine for lists, too (e.g.,
MATLAB). But remember how we introduced the idea of copying by reference vs. copying by value? Copying by value means
creating a copy of the value stored in the variable and assigning it to the new variable. That's what happens for
strings, ints, floats, and booleans. But in Python, lists are different; they copy by reference. So in the example
above, what happens is that the variable `list2` is actually "pointing to" the exact same variable as `list1`.

What does this mean, and why does it matter? Consider the following code:

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1

list2[0] = -1
list1[-1] = -1

print(list1)
print(list2)
```

the output here is:

```text
[-1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
[-1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
```

Notice that both lists are the same! When `list2` is created and set equal to `list1`, you can think of that as two
different variables pointing to the same data. So a command using either name to change its data changes the underlying
data for both.

This is where the `.copy()` method is useful. If you actually want to create a copy so that you can change one without
changing the other, you have to use `.copy()`.

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1.copy()

list2[0] = -1
list1[-1] = -1

print(list1)
print(list2)
```

Which results in:

```text
[1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
[-1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

The `.copy()` method for a list creates what is called a _shallow_ copy. This means that the top-level variable (the
list) itself is copied. It is then filled with all the same variables that were in the list. So if these are integers
like in the example above, you get a pure copy. However, if one of the items in the list is _another list_, then you still
only get a _reference_ to that list in the new list.

```python
list1 = [1, 2, 3]
list2 = ["a", "b", "c"]
list3 = [list1, list2]

list4 = list3.copy()
list3[0] = "apple"
list2[0] = "A"

print(list3)
print(list4)

```

Which results in:

```text
['apple', ['A', 'b', 'c']]
[[1, 2, 3], ['A', 'b', 'c']]
```

The string "apple" replaces the first element in `list3` as expected, but `list4` remains unchanged because `list4` is a
shallow copy, which means its top-level elements were copied separately. However, both `list3` and `list4` still hold
references to the same `list2` object. So, when we modify `list2` by changing "a" to "A", the change is reflected in
both `list3` and `list4` because they both reference the same `list2`. In contrast, replacing `list1` with "apple" in
`list3` only affects `list3`, since the reference to `list1` in `list4` remains intact.

If you want to copy everything in a list so you can change everything inside of it, you need to use a function called
`deepcopy()`.

```python
import copy

list1 = [1, 2, 3]
list2 = ["a", "b", "c"]
list3 = [list1, list2]
list4 = copy.deepcopy(list3)
```

Next: [2.6. Tuples](2.6.%20Tuples.md)<br>
Previous: [2.4. Lists](2.4.%20Lists.md)

Commit message:

Update 2.5 Add section on sorting

ebook/CH02/2.5. List Methods.md, after:

# 2.5. List methods

## List methods

Like the other data types (`str`, `int`, `float`, etc.), lists are an object, which means they have functions (called
methods) that is a built-in part of the list and that you can call using the `.method_name()` procedure. For example:

```python
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

list1.append(31)  # adds a single item to the end of a list: list1 = list2 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23, 31]

list1.clear()  # removes all items from a list, resulting in an empty list: list1 = []

# let's recreate list1
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]
list2 = list1.copy()  # creates a copy of the list: list2 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

x = list1.count(23)  #  tells you how many times a particular element occurs in a list: x = 2

list2 = ['dog', 'cat']
list1.extend(list2) # concatenates a list onto the end of a list: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 23, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']

x = list1.index(23)  # tells you the first index where the element is found: x = 2. will cause error if not in list

list1.insert(2, 34)  # inserts a 34 in the 3rd position, moving others back: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 23, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']

x = list1.pop(3)  # removes element at specified position: x = 23, list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 23, 'dog', 'cat']
x = list1.pop()  # default for pop, if not specified, is -1, the last element in the list: x = 'cat', list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 23, 'dog']

list1.remove(23)  # removes the first occurrence of the specified value from the list: list1 = [1, 65, 34, 77, 'dog']

# again, let's start over with the original list
list1 = [1, 65, 23, 77, 23]

list1.reverse()  # reversed the order of the list: list1 = [23, 77, 23, 65, 1]

list1.sort()  #  sorts the list. list1 = [1, 23, 23, 65, 77]
list1.sort(reverse=True)  # sorts a list in largest to smallest order: list1 = [77, 65, 23, 23, 1]

# let's change the list up a bit
list1 = [1, 6, 3, "dog", "cat"]
list1.sort()  #  ERROR: you can't sort a list that mixes different types of data

# Let's sort lists of tuples
mixed_list = [("a", 6), ("c", 2), ("b", 4)]
mixed_list.sort(key=lambda x: x[1])  # sorts by the second element of each tuple
print(mixed_list)  # prints out: [('c', 2), ('b', 4), ('a', 6)]

# sort by the first element of each tuple
mixed_list.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])  # sorts by the first element of each tuple
print(mixed_list)  # prints out: [('a', 6), ('b', 4), ('c', 2)]

# prioritize sorting by the first element, then the second
mixed_list.sort(key=lambda x: (x[0], x[1]))
print(mixed_list)  # prints out: [('a', 6), ('b', 4), ('c', 2)]
```

## List copying: Python list assignments are copies by reference!

You may have noticed that one of the methods for a list is `.copy()`. Why is this necessary? Can't we make a copy by doing
the following?

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1
```

That works for strings, ints, floats, and booleans — in some other languages, this would work fine for lists, too (e.g.,
MATLAB). But remember how we introduced the idea of copying by reference vs. copying by value? Copying by value means
creating a copy of the value stored in the variable and assigning it to the new variable. That's what happens for
strings, ints, floats, and booleans. But in Python, lists are different; they copy by reference. So in the example
above, what happens is that the variable `list2` is actually "pointing to" the exact same variable as `list1`.

What does this mean, and why does it matter? Consider the following code:

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1

list2[0] = -1
list1[-1] = -1

print(list1)
print(list2)
```

the output here is:

```text
[-1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
[-1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
```

Notice that both lists are the same! When `list2` is created and set equal to `list1`, you can think of that as two
different variables pointing to the same data. So a command using either name to change its data changes the underlying
data for both.

This is where the `.copy()` method is useful. If you actually want to create a copy so that you can change one without
changing the other, you have to use `.copy()`.

```python
list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list2 = list1.copy()

list2[0] = -1
list1[-1] = -1

print(list1)
print(list2)
```

Which results in:

```text
[1, 2, 3, 4, -1]
[-1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

The `.copy()` method for a list creates what is called a _shallow_ copy. This means that the top-level variable (the
list) itself is copied. It is then filled with all the same variables that were in the list. So if these are integers
like in the example above, you get a pure copy. However, if one of the items in the list is _another list_, then you still
only get a _reference_ to that list in the new list.

```python
list1 = [1, 2, 3]
list2 = ["a", "b", "c"]
list3 = [list1, list2]

list4 = list3.copy()
list3[0] = "apple"
list2[0] = "A"

print(list3)
print(list4)

```

Which results in:

```text
['apple', ['A', 'b', 'c']]
[[1, 2, 3], ['A', 'b', 'c']]
```

The string "apple" replaces the first element in `list3` as expected, but `list4` remains unchanged because `list4` is a
shallow copy, which means its top-level elements were copied separately. However, both `list3` and `list4` still hold
references to the same `list2` object. So, when we modify `list2` by changing "a" to "A", the change is reflected in
both `list3` and `list4` because they both reference the same `list2`. In contrast, replacing `list1` with "apple" in
`list3` only affects `list3`, since the reference to `list1` in `list4` remains intact.

If you want to copy everything in a list so you can change everything inside of it, you need to use a function called
`deepcopy()`.

```python
import copy

list1 = [1, 2, 3]
list2 = ["a", "b", "c"]
list3 = [list1, list2]
list4 = copy.deepcopy(list3)
```

Next: [2.6. Tuples](2.6.%20Tuples.md)<br>
Previous: [2.4. Lists](2.4.%20Lists.md)
