ebook/CH02/2.6. Tuples.md, before:

# 2.6. Tuples

Tuples are the final data structure we need to deal with in this chapter. Tuples are just like lists, except that they
are _immutable_. This, you might remember, means that they cannot be changed. ("Mutable" means the opposite — a mutable
object can be changed.) Tuples are created using parentheses, as compared to the square brackets we used for lists.

```python
some_list = [1, 2, 3, 4]
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)

x = some_list[2]  # x = 3
y = some_tuple[2]  # y = 3

some_list[3] = -4  # changes list to [1, 2, 3, -4]
some_tuple[3] = -4  # ERROR: this will generate a syntax error because tuples are immutable
```

Why have an immutable version of a list? There are a couple of reasons. First, there may be some times you want to
create a data structure that you want to protect so that it cannot change. Making something a tuple is a good way to
guarantee that the data won't change.

A second reason, which we will learn more about later, is that certain other more complex data types _require_ the use
of immutable data types. For example, we will learn later about sets. Sets are like lists that can't have duplicates.
Sets also require the data in them to be immutable, like strings, ints, floats, or tuples; you can't create a set of
lists.

A third reason is that tuples are faster and more memory-efficient than lists. This is because tuples are immutable, so Python can optimize them
for speed.

Finally, a fourth reason is related to convention. A list is often thought of as a collection of different items (e.g., a list of different names of people) while a tuple is often used to represent a single item with multiple properties (e.g., a tuple representing a _person_, along with their name, age, and home town).

## Converting between tuples and lists

Now, let's say you find yourself with a tuple that you do want to change. You can easily convert a list to a tuple and
vice versa.

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
some_list = list(some_tuple)

another_tuple = tuple(some_list)
another_list = list(another_tuple)

some_list[0] = -1
print(some_tuple)
print(some_list)
print(another_tuple)
print(another_list)
```

This creates the output:

```text
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[-1, 2, 3, 4]
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Notice that the first list was changed as expected, but the second list was not. When a list is converted to a tuple and
then back to a list, a _copy_ is made; it is not another "copy by reference" situation. It is an entirely new list.

## Tuple methods

Because tuples are immutable, they don't have most of the methods that lists have, like `.append()`, `.remove()`,
`.insert()`, etc. There are only two methods for tuples:

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
x = some_tuple.count(3)  # x = 1, the number of times that 2 occurs in the tuple
x = some_tuple.index(3)  # x = 2, the index of the location of the first occurrence of 3 in the tuple
```

## Tuple unpacking

Tuple unpacking is a convenient way of assigning values from a tuple to multiple variables. It's called "tuple unpacking", but it can be used with any iterable in Python, including lists, strings, and even dictionaries (more on that later; dictionaries work a little differently).

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3)
a, b, c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 2 3
```

You can also use the `*` operator to unpack parts of the tuple into a list. This can be a good way to get the last few
elements or the middle elements of a tuple.

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)

# Unpack the first element and the last element into a and c, and the rest into b
a, *b, c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 [2, 3, 4] 5

# Unpack the first two elements into a and b, and the rest into c
a, b, *c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 2 [3, 4, 5]
```

## Named tuples

Named tuples are a special type of tuple where each element has a "name", making the code more readable and
self-documenting. They're available in the `collections` module (which comes with Python) and they combine the benefits
of tuples (immutability) with the ability to access elements by name instead of just by index.

```python
from collections import namedtuple

# Create a named tuple class called 'Point' with fields 'x' and 'y'
Point = namedtuple('Point', ['x', 'y'])

# Create a new Point instance called 'p'
p = Point(x=10, y=20)

# Access values using names
print(p.x)    # prints 10
print(p.y)    # prints 20

# Access values using indices (still works like a regular tuple!)
print(p[0])   # prints 10
print(p[1])   # prints 20

# Convert to regular tuple if needed
regular_tuple = tuple(p)  # (10, 20)

# Unpack like a regular tuple
x, y = p      # x = 10, y = 20
```

Named tuples are particularly useful when working with data that has a clear structure, like coordinates, RGB colors, or
database records. They provide better code readability compared to regular tuples while maintaining the benefits of
immutability.

```python
# Example with multiple named tuples
Person = namedtuple('Person', ['name', 'age', 'city'])
Color = namedtuple('Color', ['red', 'green', 'blue'])

alice = Person('Alice', 30, 'New York') # could also have used: Person(name='Alice', age=30, city='New York')
red = Color(255, 0, 0)

print(alice.name)     # prints 'Alice'
print(red.blue)      # prints 0
```

Next: [2.7. Looping Over Lists and Tuples](2.7.%20Looping%20Over%20Lists%20and%20Tuples.md)<br>
Previous: [2.5. List Methods](2.5.%20List%20Methods.md)

Commit message:

Update 2.6 with a note that the star operator works on all iterables

ebook/CH02/2.6. Tuples.md, after:

# 2.6. Tuples

Tuples are the final data structure we need to deal with in this chapter. Tuples are just like lists, except that they
are _immutable_. This, you might remember, means that they cannot be changed. ("Mutable" means the opposite — a mutable
object can be changed.) Tuples are created using parentheses, as compared to the square brackets we used for lists.

```python
some_list = [1, 2, 3, 4]
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)

x = some_list[2]  # x = 3
y = some_tuple[2]  # y = 3

some_list[3] = -4  # changes list to [1, 2, 3, -4]
some_tuple[3] = -4  # ERROR: this will generate a syntax error because tuples are immutable
```

Why have an immutable version of a list? There are a couple of reasons. First, there may be some times you want to
create a data structure that you want to protect so that it cannot change. Making something a tuple is a good way to
guarantee that the data won't change.

A second reason, which we will learn more about later, is that certain other more complex data types _require_ the use
of immutable data types. For example, we will learn later about sets. Sets are like lists that can't have duplicates.
Sets also require the data in them to be immutable, like strings, ints, floats, or tuples; you can't create a set of
lists.

A third reason is that tuples are faster and more memory-efficient than lists. This is because tuples are immutable, so Python can optimize them
for speed.

Finally, a fourth reason is related to convention. A list is often thought of as a collection of different items (e.g., a list of different names of people) while a tuple is often used to represent a single item with multiple properties (e.g., a tuple representing a _person_, along with their name, age, and home town).

## Converting between tuples and lists

Now, let's say you find yourself with a tuple that you do want to change. You can easily convert a list to a tuple and
vice versa.

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
some_list = list(some_tuple)

another_tuple = tuple(some_list)
another_list = list(another_tuple)

some_list[0] = -1
print(some_tuple)
print(some_list)
print(another_tuple)
print(another_list)
```

This creates the output:

```text
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[-1, 2, 3, 4]
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Notice that the first list was changed as expected, but the second list was not. When a list is converted to a tuple and
then back to a list, a _copy_ is made; it is not another "copy by reference" situation. It is an entirely new list.

## Tuple methods

Because tuples are immutable, they don't have most of the methods that lists have, like `.append()`, `.remove()`,
`.insert()`, etc. There are only two methods for tuples:

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
x = some_tuple.count(3)  # x = 1, the number of times that 2 occurs in the tuple
x = some_tuple.index(3)  # x = 2, the index of the location of the first occurrence of 3 in the tuple
```

## Tuple unpacking

Tuple unpacking is a convenient way of assigning values from a tuple to multiple variables. It's called "tuple unpacking", but it can be used with any iterable in Python, including lists, strings, and even dictionaries (more on that later; dictionaries work a little differently).

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3)
a, b, c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 2 3
```

You can also use the `*` operator to unpack parts of the tuple into a list. This can be a good way to get the last few
elements or the middle elements of a tuple. (You can use the `*` operator to unpack any iterable, not just tuples.)

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)

# Unpack the first element and the last element into a and c, and the rest into b
a, *b, c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 [2, 3, 4] 5

# Unpack the first two elements into a and b, and the rest into c
a, b, *c = some_tuple
print(a, b, c)  # prints 1 2 [3, 4, 5]
```

## Named tuples

Named tuples are a special type of tuple where each element has a "name", making the code more readable and
self-documenting. They're available in the `collections` module (which comes with Python) and they combine the benefits
of tuples (immutability) with the ability to access elements by name instead of just by index.

```python
from collections import namedtuple

# Create a named tuple class called 'Point' with fields 'x' and 'y'
Point = namedtuple('Point', ['x', 'y'])

# Create a new Point instance called 'p'
p = Point(x=10, y=20)

# Access values using names
print(p.x)    # prints 10
print(p.y)    # prints 20

# Access values using indices (still works like a regular tuple!)
print(p[0])   # prints 10
print(p[1])   # prints 20

# Convert to regular tuple if needed
regular_tuple = tuple(p)  # (10, 20)

# Unpack like a regular tuple
x, y = p      # x = 10, y = 20
```

Named tuples are particularly useful when working with data that has a clear structure, like coordinates, RGB colors, or
database records. They provide better code readability compared to regular tuples while maintaining the benefits of
immutability.

```python
# Example with multiple named tuples
Person = namedtuple('Person', ['name', 'age', 'city'])
Color = namedtuple('Color', ['red', 'green', 'blue'])

alice = Person('Alice', 30, 'New York') # could also have used: Person(name='Alice', age=30, city='New York')
red = Color(255, 0, 0)

print(alice.name)     # prints 'Alice'
print(red.blue)      # prints 0
```

Next: [2.7. Looping Over Lists and Tuples](2.7.%20Looping%20Over%20Lists%20and%20Tuples.md)<br>
Previous: [2.5. List Methods](2.5.%20List%20Methods.md)
