ebook/CH02/2.9. File Input and Output.md, before:

# 2.9. File input and output

Terminal output is very useful for getting information about how our program is working and for debugging. Terminal
input is occasionally useful but is not used often. In the vast majority of Python programs, the way we typically get
input and output is by using data files.

Consider homework 1, for example. It would be really painful to have to manually type in the data from an experiment,
either into the terminal or into the Python script itself. What we want instead is a program that reads a data file,
does the calculations, and outputs data to another file. In this section, we will start with learning how to create,
modify, and write files.

## File input

### Opening files

In Python, before we can read from or write to a file, we need to open the file. What that means in Python is
effectively telling Python where the file is (or where it should be created if it doesn't exist) and then telling python
to create a "file object" variable, which includes information like the file's name and location, both in the terms we
are used to reading (like `/Users/my_name/Desktop/my_file.txt`) and also in terms of its memory location address in terms
the computer understands (those hex code numbers we talked about on day 1).

In Python, these file object data types are typically referred to as "file handles," and so it is common to name the
variable where we are storing that object something that has that in it. It is variable, so you can name it anything you
want (as long as it follows the Python rules for variables), but it is a convention to include `file_handle` in the
variable name (sometimes abbreviated as `fh`). You want to make sure you remember that the `file_handle` (the file
itself) might be a separate variable from a string variable where you are keeping track of the file's name or location.

```python
file_path = "~/Desktop/"
file_name = "test_file.txt"
file_handle = open(file_path + file_name)
```

> [!TIP]
>
> You can use pathlib to create file paths. These are often easier to work with than strings representing file paths,
> and they are cross-platform (meaning they will work on Windows, Mac, and Linux — yes, with forward slashes).
>
> ```python
> from pathlib import Path
>
> file_path = Path.home() / "Desktop"
> file_name = "test_file.txt"
> file_handle = open(file_path / file_name)
> ```

The code above would try to open a file called "test_file.txt" that is on the Desktop. If that file does not exist, this
line will get an error. In a few weeks, we will learn a handy trick to test to see if a file exists before trying to
open it so you don't get this error.

The `open()` function can take a number of other arguments that affect the file object that is being created. If no
arguments are specified, then the file object being created is a "read" object — a file that you are trying to read. This
is why you get an error if the file doesn't exist. But what if you want to create a new file and write to it? Then you
just need to supply an additional argument to the open function like this:

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "w")
```

The "w" tells Python that this is a file you want to write. Python will therefore create a file with that name. Two
things to remember:

- if you only specify a name (as in the example immediately above), and do not supply a full path (as in the first
  example), then the file will be created in the same location as the Python script that is running that line of code.
- the "w" command creates and writes a file with that name, even if there is already a file with that name. It will
  overwrite any existing file with that name. **So be careful not to accidentally overwrite a file you don't want to
  erase!** There are some alternatives to avoid this, noted below

There are a number of other options you can use instead of "w".

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "r")  # opens a file for reading, the default if no option is specified
file_handle = open(file_name, "x")  # opens a file only if the file does not exist and gives an error if it does
file_handle = open(file_name, "a")  # Creates new file if none exists; opens existing file to append to it if one does
```

### Writing to files

Writing to files is a lot like using the `print()` statement, except the output ends up in the file instead of in the
terminal.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
```

There are a couple of differences between the `.write()` method and the `print()` function. Remember that `print()`
automatically inserts a "\n" at the end of whatever it is told to print. The `.write()` method doesn't do that. So if you
want to write multiple lines to a file, you need to insert those line breaks yourself. In the code below, the output to
the terminal and in the file would look the same.

```python
favorite_food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for food in favorite_food_list:
    print(food)
    file_handle.write(food + "\n")
```

Other than that, `print()` and `.write()` are pretty much the same. You can do all the same string formatting that you
might do with `print()` using `.write()`.

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    file_handle.write(f"{food_list[i]}: {number_list[i]:0.3f}\n")
```

Of course, if we follow our "keep different operations separate" principle, we may want to split that written statement
into two lines:

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    output_string = f"{food_list[i]}: {number_list[i]:0.3f}\n"
    file_handle.write(output_string)
```

### Closing a file

When you are done working with a file, you should close the file. This is especially important if you are going to be
working with multiple files and re-using the file_handle variable name (like in a loop). If you don't, you might end
up accidentally writing to the wrong file. And if your program tries to open a file that you have already opened, you
will get an error.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
file_handle.close()
```

## File input

Reading input from files is also easy. Let's imagine that in the same directory, we are running our program; we have a
text file called "animals.txt" with the following data:

```text
dog
cat
mouse
lion
tiger
elephant
cow
horse
pig
```

Imagine that we want to open this file, read the data, and store it in a list. That's very simple, though there a
a couple of different ways that we can do it.

### The `.read()` method

The first is the `.read()` method. To understand the `.read()` method, you have to imagine that there is a cursor in the
file, and it starts at the very beginning of the file when you use the `open()` function. So when you then use the
`.read()` method, it reads in the number of specified characters and then moves the cursor to that position. If no
number is specified, it reads everything until the end of the file.

So if we use `.read()` with no number, we get the whole file stored as one big string. So if we want the data in a list,
we're going to need to parse that string. Remember that because in the file, each animal was on its own line, so in
reality, the string looks like this: "dog\ncat\nmouse\nlion\n\tiger\nelephant\ncow\nhorse\npig". There is no \n after
pig because there is no new line after pig, which you can tell because there isn't a blank line at the end of the file.

So how do we convert this to a list? It's easy because we have the same character between each of our words: \n. So we
can just split using that character.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
data = animal_file_handle.read()
animal_file_handle.close()

animal_list = data.split('\n')
```

If we had passed a number argument to `.read()`, then the cursor is in that position, and so the next time `.read()` is
used, it will start there. Using read with a number is actually pretty rare since we rarely have a file organized in
terms of precise numbers of characters. But `.read()` without any numbers can be useful if we want to just store the
data as a string for now and worry about how to parse it later. Sometimes this can be an issue if the file is really big
(like gigabytes big), and you end up with more data than the amount of RAM you have on your computer. If this happens,
your computer will start running very, very slow because it will be using your hard drive memory instead of your RAM
memory to store the data, and accessing your hard drive is much much slower than accessing RAM.

### The `.readline()` and `.readlines()` methods

The `.readline()` function reads one line at a time. Basically, it goes from wherever the cursor is (which starts at the
beginning of the file) until it encounters a \n and stores all the characters in between into a string. You can use it
more than once to get more than one line. You could use `.read()` to read in our file and create a list. But you would
need to use the `.readline()` method nine times. That wouldn't be very pretty, and it would rely on you knowing it
needed to happen nine times.

The `.readlines()` method works similarly to `.readline()`, except that it reads multiple lines and stores the result in
a list. This is very close to what we need. The only issue is that the file has no \n characters in it, so these will
end up in the list, which would make your list look like this: ['dog\n', 'cat\n', 'mouse\n', ...]. To fix this, we could
then use a loop to remove those characters.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = animal_file_handle.readlines()
animal_file_handle.close()

for i in range(len(animal_list)):
    animal_list[i] = animal_list[i].strip('\n')

```

### Looping through files

Another method, and a very useful one, is to loop through a file using the file object itself as the sequence. Remember
that a for loop must use a sequence in the definition of a for loop, and Python lets you treat the file as a sequence,
with each line being a sequence element.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = []

for line in animal_file_handle:
    animal = line.strip("\n")
    animal_list.append(animal)
animal_file_handle.close()
```

### The `with` statement

A final useful trick to use when reading files in Python is the `with` statement. Using `with` allows us to open the file and automatically close it when the block of code is finished. This is very
useful because it frees us from having to remember to close the file, which is a common source of errors.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_list = []

with open(animal_file_name) as animal_file_handle:
    for line in animal_file_handle:
        animal = line.strip('\n')
        animal_list.append(animal)
```

Next: [2.10. Try and Except](2.10.%20Try%20and%20Except.md)<br>
Previous: [2.8. Terminal Input and Output](2.8.%20Terminal%20Input%20and%20Output.md)

Commit message:

Update 2.9 with some more handy info on pathlib Paths

ebook/CH02/2.9. File Input and Output.md, after:

# 2.9. File input and output

Terminal output is very useful for getting information about how our program is working and for debugging. Terminal
input is occasionally useful but is not used often. In the vast majority of Python programs, the way we typically get
input and output is by using data files.

Consider homework 1, for example. It would be really painful to have to manually type in the data from an experiment,
either into the terminal or into the Python script itself. What we want instead is a program that reads a data file,
does the calculations, and outputs data to another file. In this section, we will start with learning how to create,
modify, and write files.

## File input

### Opening files

In Python, before we can read from or write to a file, we need to open the file. What that means in Python is
effectively telling Python where the file is (or where it should be created if it doesn't exist) and then telling python
to create a "file object" variable, which includes information like the file's name and location, both in the terms we
are used to reading (like `/Users/my_name/Desktop/my_file.txt`) and also in terms of its memory location address in terms
the computer understands (those hex code numbers we talked about on day 1).

In Python, these file object data types are typically referred to as "file handles," and so it is common to name the
variable where we are storing that object something that has that in it. It is variable, so you can name it anything you
want (as long as it follows the Python rules for variables), but it is a convention to include `file_handle` in the
variable name (sometimes abbreviated as `fh`). You want to make sure you remember that the `file_handle` (the file
itself) might be a separate variable from a string variable where you are keeping track of the file's name or location.

```python
file_path = "~/Desktop/"
file_name = "test_file.txt"
file_handle = open(file_path + file_name)
```

> [!TIP]
>
> You can use pathlib to create file paths. These are often easier to work with than strings representing file paths,
> and they are cross-platform (meaning they will work on Windows, Mac, and Linux — yes, with forward slashes).
>
> ```python
> from pathlib import Path
>
> file_path = Path.home() / "Desktop"
> file_name = "test_file.txt"
> file_handle = open(file_path / file_name)
> ```
> 
> `Path`s come with a number of handy properties, such as `name`, `stem`, `parent`, and `suffix`.

The code above would try to open a file called "test_file.txt" that is on the Desktop. If that file does not exist, this
line will get an error. In a few weeks, we will learn a handy trick to test to see if a file exists before trying to
open it so you don't get this error.

The `open()` function can take a number of other arguments that affect the file object that is being created. If no
arguments are specified, then the file object being created is a "read" object — a file that you are trying to read. This
is why you get an error if the file doesn't exist. But what if you want to create a new file and write to it? Then you
just need to supply an additional argument to the open function like this:

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "w")
```

The "w" tells Python that this is a file you want to write. Python will therefore create a file with that name. Two
things to remember:

- if you only specify a name (as in the example immediately above), and do not supply a full path (as in the first
  example), then the file will be created in the same location as the Python script that is running that line of code.
- the "w" command creates and writes a file with that name, even if there is already a file with that name. It will
  overwrite any existing file with that name. **So be careful not to accidentally overwrite a file you don't want to
  erase!** There are some alternatives to avoid this, noted below

There are a number of other options you can use instead of "w".

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "r")  # opens a file for reading, the default if no option is specified
file_handle = open(file_name, "x")  # opens a file only if the file does not exist and gives an error if it does
file_handle = open(file_name, "a")  # Creates new file if none exists; opens existing file to append to it if one does
```

### Writing to files

Writing to files is a lot like using the `print()` statement, except the output ends up in the file instead of in the
terminal.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
```

There are a couple of differences between the `.write()` method and the `print()` function. Remember that `print()`
automatically inserts a "\n" at the end of whatever it is told to print. The `.write()` method doesn't do that. So if you
want to write multiple lines to a file, you need to insert those line breaks yourself. In the code below, the output to
the terminal and in the file would look the same.

```python
favorite_food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for food in favorite_food_list:
    print(food)
    file_handle.write(food + "\n")
```

Other than that, `print()` and `.write()` are pretty much the same. You can do all the same string formatting that you
might do with `print()` using `.write()`.

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    file_handle.write(f"{food_list[i]}: {number_list[i]:0.3f}\n")
```

Of course, if we follow our "keep different operations separate" principle, we may want to split that written statement
into two lines:

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ["pizza", "ice cream", "strawberries"]
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    output_string = f"{food_list[i]}: {number_list[i]:0.3f}\n"
    file_handle.write(output_string)
```

### Closing a file

When you are done working with a file, you should close the file. This is especially important if you are going to be
working with multiple files and re-using the file_handle variable name (like in a loop). If you don't, you might end
up accidentally writing to the wrong file. And if your program tries to open a file that you have already opened, you
will get an error.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
file_handle.close()
```

## File input

Reading input from files is also easy. Let's imagine that in the same directory, we are running our program; we have a
text file called "animals.txt" with the following data:

```text
dog
cat
mouse
lion
tiger
elephant
cow
horse
pig
```

Imagine that we want to open this file, read the data, and store it in a list. That's very simple, though there a
a couple of different ways that we can do it.

### The `.read()` method

The first is the `.read()` method. To understand the `.read()` method, you have to imagine that there is a cursor in the
file, and it starts at the very beginning of the file when you use the `open()` function. So when you then use the
`.read()` method, it reads in the number of specified characters and then moves the cursor to that position. If no
number is specified, it reads everything until the end of the file.

So if we use `.read()` with no number, we get the whole file stored as one big string. So if we want the data in a list,
we're going to need to parse that string. Remember that because in the file, each animal was on its own line, so in
reality, the string looks like this: "dog\ncat\nmouse\nlion\n\tiger\nelephant\ncow\nhorse\npig". There is no \n after
pig because there is no new line after pig, which you can tell because there isn't a blank line at the end of the file.

So how do we convert this to a list? It's easy because we have the same character between each of our words: \n. So we
can just split using that character.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
data = animal_file_handle.read()
animal_file_handle.close()

animal_list = data.split('\n')
```

If we had passed a number argument to `.read()`, then the cursor is in that position, and so the next time `.read()` is
used, it will start there. Using read with a number is actually pretty rare since we rarely have a file organized in
terms of precise numbers of characters. But `.read()` without any numbers can be useful if we want to just store the
data as a string for now and worry about how to parse it later. Sometimes this can be an issue if the file is really big
(like gigabytes big), and you end up with more data than the amount of RAM you have on your computer. If this happens,
your computer will start running very, very slow because it will be using your hard drive memory instead of your RAM
memory to store the data, and accessing your hard drive is much much slower than accessing RAM.

### The `.readline()` and `.readlines()` methods

The `.readline()` function reads one line at a time. Basically, it goes from wherever the cursor is (which starts at the
beginning of the file) until it encounters a \n and stores all the characters in between into a string. You can use it
more than once to get more than one line. You could use `.read()` to read in our file and create a list. But you would
need to use the `.readline()` method nine times. That wouldn't be very pretty, and it would rely on you knowing it
needed to happen nine times.

The `.readlines()` method works similarly to `.readline()`, except that it reads multiple lines and stores the result in
a list. This is very close to what we need. The only issue is that the file has no \n characters in it, so these will
end up in the list, which would make your list look like this: ['dog\n', 'cat\n', 'mouse\n', ...]. To fix this, we could
then use a loop to remove those characters.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = animal_file_handle.readlines()
animal_file_handle.close()

for i in range(len(animal_list)):
    animal_list[i] = animal_list[i].strip('\n')

```

### Looping through files

Another method, and a very useful one, is to loop through a file using the file object itself as the sequence. Remember
that a for loop must use a sequence in the definition of a for loop, and Python lets you treat the file as a sequence,
with each line being a sequence element.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = []

for line in animal_file_handle:
    animal = line.strip("\n")
    animal_list.append(animal)
animal_file_handle.close()
```

### The `with` statement

A final useful trick to use when reading files in Python is the `with` statement. Using `with` allows us to open the file and automatically close it when the block of code is finished. This is very
useful because it frees us from having to remember to close the file, which is a common source of errors.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_list = []

with open(animal_file_name) as animal_file_handle:
    for line in animal_file_handle:
        animal = line.strip('\n')
        animal_list.append(animal)
```

Next: [2.10. Try and Except](2.10.%20Try%20and%20Except.md)<br>
Previous: [2.8. Terminal Input and Output](2.8.%20Terminal%20Input%20and%20Output.md)
