ebook/CH05/5.0. Core Python Modules.md, before:

# 5.0 Core Python modules

This week we're going to learn about a bunch of modules that you can use to do different useful things.

As we've said, a Python module is just an extra bit of code (functions, data types, or classes) that are not a part of
standard Python, but which you can import to give it added functionality. There are two basic kinds of Python modules:

- "Core" Python modules, which are created by the same people who made Python
- "Third party" modules (called that because they were not created by the Python creators or you).

Core modules come installed with Python, so all you need to do is use an import statement to use them. Third party
modules need to be installed. In the rest of this section we will go over some useful core python modules, and then we
will talk about one of the most popular third party modules (NumPy) in later sections.

## The `math` module

The `math` module gives you a bunch of basic math operations:

```python
import math
x = 82.2

a = math.sqrt(x)  # for calculating square roots, result 9.066
b = math.ceil(x)  # rounds a number up, result 83
c = math.floor(x)  # rounds a number down, result 82
d = math.log10(x)  # 1.914
e = math.cos(x) # 0.868
f = math.pi  # result is 3.1415....
```

There are many, many more `math` functions. You can see the full list here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html.

## The `time` module

The `time` module is, as you would expect, for various time related functions. Some of you may have already used it to
slow down the Tkinter graphics.

```python
import time

for i in range(10):
    print(i)
    time.sleep(0.1)  # forces python to pause and not execute the next line for 0.1 seconds
```

### Tracking how long code takes to execute (or how long a user takes to do something)

Another very common use of the `time` module is to keep track of how long certain operations take. This can be useful for
comparing different ways of writing code to see which runs faster. It can also be useful as experimental data. Think
back to the big five survey. We could keep track of how long it took people to answer each question. Maybe how much time
they had to think about each question would tell us something extra about their personality?

```python
import time
x = 0
start_time = time.time()  # retrieves the current system time in seconds
for i in range(1000):
    x += 1
stop_time = time.time()  # again retrieves the current system time in seconds
elapsed_time = stop_time - start_time
```

The times you get from `time.time()` is a big number, in seconds. Technically, It is a number that is defined as the
number of seconds that have elapsed since some arbitrary time. On Mac/Linux, it is the number of seconds since January
1, 1970, 00:00:00 (UTC). So the absolute number isn't that important. What is useful is for comparing two different
times as we did above, to get amount of time that has elapsed. Notice that it gives you 5 decimal points. Technically
that is 1/100 of a millisecond accuracy! But in reality, for various reasons having to do with computer operating
systems, the time is not that trustworthy. Supposedly on Macs and Linux machines you can trust the numbers out to the
third decimal place (millisecond accuracy), whereas on Windows you can only trust it out to the second decimal point
(there is 16 ms of noise in each `time.time()` estimate on Windows computers). Note: if your computer is fast enough,
you may need to use `time.perf_counter()` instead of `time.time()` in order to see any appreciable differences for such
computations. Computers just keep getting faster!

Other time functions can be read about here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/time.html.

## The `datetime` module

The `datetime` module can be used to get all kinds of current day and time information, and to format it various ways.

```python
import datetime
x = datetime.datetime.now()  # gets the current date and time and stores it in a datetime object
print(x)  # result looks like datetime.datetime(2023, 2, 21, 20, 7, 5, 749192)
# that is year, month, day, hour, minute, second (in system clock units

# you can then convert this to a formatted string:
my_date_time_string = x.strftime("Day: %d  Month: %b   Year: %Y")
```

There are all kinds of different %-sign symbols you can stick in there to convert the datetime object to different
formats. You can see them here: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_datetime.asp.

The datetime module has tons of other date and time related functions, for doing things like comparing lengths of time,
checking if days are weekdays, converting times, and other stuff. You can read more here:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html.

## The `random` module

The random module allows us to generate pseudo random numbers and lists of numbers from various distributions.
We say "pseudo" because it is actually impossible to generate truly random numbers (well, except _perhaps_ without
using quantum physics). Any algorithm we would use to generate the numbers will be deterministic by definition,
and so pure randomness isn't possible. So when you want a "random" number, python gets the current system time out
to a pretty extreme decimal point, and then performs an algorithmic transformation of that to give you back a number
that is pretty darn close to random, assuming you aren't performing it on a regular basis every 0.00001 seconds.

```python
import random
a = random.random()  # generates a random float between 0 and 1
b = random.randint(4, 10)  # generates a random number between 4 and 10 (inclusive)
c = random.uniform(4, 10)  # generates a random float between 4 and 10 (inclusive)
d = random.gauss(4, 10) # generates a number from a gaussian (normal) distribution with a mean of 4 and stdev of 10
list1 = [a, b, c, d]
random.shuffle(list1)  # randomizes the elements of a list, copy it first if you want to save the original!
random.choice(list1)  # chooses a random item from the list
```

### Random seed

As we noted, the random numbers you can generate with Python (or any programming language) are not truly random. They are
generated by an algorithm that by default uses the system time to five decimal places as the input and sticks that in a
very funky hard-to-predict equation to get a very hard-to-predict number back out. So this is good if you want very hard
to predict random numbers. But sometimes we want to be able to replicate analyses we do using random numbers. This is
where a random "seed" comes in. The seed is the number that is stuck into the funky equation, that by default is the
system time. But you can set the random seed to any number you want, and if you consistently use the same random seed,
then you will consistently get back the same "random" number.

```python
import random

random_int1 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # you won't be able to predict this number

random_seed = 10
random.seed(random_seed)

random_int2 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # this number will be the same every time
random_int3 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # this number will also be the same every time, but not the same as the last one

random.seed()
random_int4 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # you won't be able to predict this number

print(random_int1, random_int2, random_int3, random_int4)
```

One thing to note about random seed is that once you set it to something (or if you use the default system time) if you
ask for 10 random numbers, you get 10 different numbers, not the same random number 10 times. Why is this? Effectively
what happens is that each time you request a new random number, the seed is changed, and so a different number is put
into the funky equation to give you back a random answer. Python automatically changes the seed each time, in a
deterministic way based on the previous random number that you requested. So that is why teh random number is different
each time you ask for a new one, it is actually using a different random seed each time. But that's also why the
sequence of random numbers is the same every time if you set the random seed manually, because each random seed that is
used is chosen deterministically from the one that came before.

There are many more things you can do with the random module, which you can read about here:
https://python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/library/random.html

## The `sys` module

The `sys` module is used to interact with the python interpreter, the actual program that executes your python code.
Below are three things you can do with `sys`, but there are dozens, which you could read about in the documents.

For each of the `sys` functions below, comment what it is doing.

### Quitting a program

There may be times you want to force your program to quit. One common situation is when you are checking to see if some
data is correct, or a user has input something wrong, and you want to stop the program if you notice a problem.

```python
import sys

some_data = [1,2,3,4,5]
if len(some_data) < 10:
    print("ERROR: Your data was supposed to have at least 10 elements. Program terminating.")
    sys.exit()
```

### Getting the memory size of an object

Sometimes you may be curious about how much of your memory a variable is taking up, if you are doing big data analyses
and your computer is running slow.

```python
import sys
x = 100000
big_list = list(range(100000))
size = sys.getsizeof(big_list) # 800056 bytes of memory
```

### Passing command-line arguments to your program

A final thing that `sys` is useful for is passing command line arguments to your program. A common use here is if you
want to specify something like a file name at the time you run a program, without hard-coding it into the program
itself. To do this, we use `sys.argv`:

```python
import sys

argument_list = sys.argv
```

The way this works is that when you run a python script that uses that line, then the name of the script, and anything
you type after the name of the script, get saved in the `sys.argv` variable. So if you typed: "python script.py pizza 1
3.14" when you ran the script, then you would end up with the list:

["script.py", "pizza", "1", "3.14"]

As noted, this is a really useful way for providing information to your program that you may want to vary different
times you run the program, like perhaps what file to use as input. Imagine the survey program you wrote for the last
homework, but also imagine that you had many files of questions, and you wanted to specify which one was used. It is
good for situations like that. (Perhaps somewhat confusingly, the script name itself is considered the first argument.)

There are many more `sys` functions, which you can read about here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html.

## The `os` module

The final module we will discuss here is the `os` module. The `os` module is a way to do operating system dependent
stuff. The most common case is using your python code to do things like make and delete folders, get lists of files in a
directory, and stuff like that.

### Creating and deleting folders and files

```python
import os
os.mkdir("new folder")  # will create a new folder named "new folder" in the directory where the program was run
os.mkdir("/Users/jon/Desktop/new folder") # will create a folder called "new folder" on my desktop

os.rmdir("new folder")  # will delete a folder called "new folder" if it exists in that location
os.remove("some_file.txt") # will delete a file called "some_file.txt" if it exists in that location
```

This won't work if the folder is there, or if the folder isn't empty. You'll get an error.

Say you want to create a folder inside a folder inside a folder, and you have the name of each stored in a string.

```python
folder1 = "music"
folder2 = "classical"
folder3 = "bach"
```

You could concatenate the strings to create a path.

```python
folder_path = folder1 + "/" + folder2 + "/" + folder3
os.mkdir(folder_path)
```

But adding all those slashes is annoying. The os module has a nice function you can use instead.

```python
folder_path = os.path.join(folder1, folder2, folder3)  # folder path will be "music/classical/bach"
os.mkdirs(folder_path)
```

Note that `mkdirs` has an extra "s". If you use `mkdir()` and the music and classical folders didn't exist, you would get an
error. But if you used `mkdirs()` it will create any chain of folders you want to make.

> [!TIP]
> Alternatively, you can use the `pathlib` module (another core Python module) to create the path and perform
> operations on it. When running `.mkdir()`, setting `parents=True` will create all the folders in the path if they
> don't exist, and `exist_ok=True` will not raise an error if the folder already exists.
>
> ```python
> from pathlib import Path
> folder_path = Path(folder1, folder2, folder3)  # folder path will be "music/classical/bach"
> folder_path.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
> ```

### Listing files and directories

There may be times you want to write a program that will read in a bunch of files and do something with all of them.
Like what if we wanted to count and sum the frequencies of words in a bunch of different files? One (bad) way to do this
is to hard-code all of the file names into the program. But that would mean you would need to change the program every
time you changed the files. A better way would be to designate a folder for all the files you want to read, and then get
a list of every file in that folder, and then open them.

```python
import os

data_directory = "my_data"
directory_list = os.listdir(data_directory)

for file_name in directory_list:
    if item[0] is not ".":
        process_file(os.path.join(data_directory,file_name))
```

In the code above, the `os.listdir()` function gives you back a list of every file in that folder. One important thing
to remember is that will include hidden files in that directory, which most operating systems begin with a ".". The if
statement above checks to see if the file name starts with a ".", and if it does not, calls some function would process
that file, and passes it the path to that file so it can be opened.

There is a whole lot more you can do with the os module, which you can read about here:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html

Next: [5.1. Installing Modules with Pip](5.1.%20Installing%20Modules%20with%20pip.md)<br>
Previous: [4.4. Lab 4](../CH04/4.4.%20Lab%204.md)

Commit message:

Update 5.0 with note about running from command line.

ebook/CH05/5.0. Core Python Modules.md, after:

# 5.0 Core Python modules

This week we're going to learn about a bunch of modules that you can use to do different useful things.

As we've said, a Python module is just an extra bit of code (functions, data types, or classes) that are not a part of
standard Python, but which you can import to give it added functionality. There are two basic kinds of Python modules:

- "Core" Python modules, which are created by the same people who made Python
- "Third party" modules (called that because they were not created by the Python creators or you).

Core modules come installed with Python, so all you need to do is use an import statement to use them. Third party
modules need to be installed. In the rest of this section we will go over some useful core python modules, and then we
will talk about one of the most popular third party modules (NumPy) in later sections.

## The `math` module

The `math` module gives you a bunch of basic math operations:

```python
import math
x = 82.2

a = math.sqrt(x)  # for calculating square roots, result 9.066
b = math.ceil(x)  # rounds a number up, result 83
c = math.floor(x)  # rounds a number down, result 82
d = math.log10(x)  # 1.914
e = math.cos(x) # 0.868
f = math.pi  # result is 3.1415....
```

There are many, many more `math` functions. You can see the full list here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/math.html.

## The `time` module

The `time` module is, as you would expect, for various time related functions. Some of you may have already used it to
slow down the Tkinter graphics.

```python
import time

for i in range(10):
    print(i)
    time.sleep(0.1)  # forces python to pause and not execute the next line for 0.1 seconds
```

### Tracking how long code takes to execute (or how long a user takes to do something)

Another very common use of the `time` module is to keep track of how long certain operations take. This can be useful for
comparing different ways of writing code to see which runs faster. It can also be useful as experimental data. Think
back to the big five survey. We could keep track of how long it took people to answer each question. Maybe how much time
they had to think about each question would tell us something extra about their personality?

```python
import time
x = 0
start_time = time.time()  # retrieves the current system time in seconds
for i in range(1000):
    x += 1
stop_time = time.time()  # again retrieves the current system time in seconds
elapsed_time = stop_time - start_time
```

The times you get from `time.time()` is a big number, in seconds. Technically, It is a number that is defined as the
number of seconds that have elapsed since some arbitrary time. On Mac/Linux, it is the number of seconds since January
1, 1970, 00:00:00 (UTC). So the absolute number isn't that important. What is useful is for comparing two different
times as we did above, to get amount of time that has elapsed. Notice that it gives you 5 decimal points. Technically
that is 1/100 of a millisecond accuracy! But in reality, for various reasons having to do with computer operating
systems, the time is not that trustworthy. Supposedly on Macs and Linux machines you can trust the numbers out to the
third decimal place (millisecond accuracy), whereas on Windows you can only trust it out to the second decimal point
(there is 16 ms of noise in each `time.time()` estimate on Windows computers). Note: if your computer is fast enough,
you may need to use `time.perf_counter()` instead of `time.time()` in order to see any appreciable differences for such
computations. Computers just keep getting faster!

Other time functions can be read about here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/time.html.

## The `datetime` module

The `datetime` module can be used to get all kinds of current day and time information, and to format it various ways.

```python
import datetime
x = datetime.datetime.now()  # gets the current date and time and stores it in a datetime object
print(x)  # result looks like datetime.datetime(2023, 2, 21, 20, 7, 5, 749192)
# that is year, month, day, hour, minute, second (in system clock units

# you can then convert this to a formatted string:
my_date_time_string = x.strftime("Day: %d  Month: %b   Year: %Y")
```

There are all kinds of different %-sign symbols you can stick in there to convert the datetime object to different
formats. You can see them here: https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_datetime.asp.

The datetime module has tons of other date and time related functions, for doing things like comparing lengths of time,
checking if days are weekdays, converting times, and other stuff. You can read more here:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html.

## The `random` module

The random module allows us to generate pseudo random numbers and lists of numbers from various distributions.
We say "pseudo" because it is actually impossible to generate truly random numbers (well, except _perhaps_ without
using quantum physics). Any algorithm we would use to generate the numbers will be deterministic by definition,
and so pure randomness isn't possible. So when you want a "random" number, python gets the current system time out
to a pretty extreme decimal point, and then performs an algorithmic transformation of that to give you back a number
that is pretty darn close to random, assuming you aren't performing it on a regular basis every 0.00001 seconds.

```python
import random
a = random.random()  # generates a random float between 0 and 1
b = random.randint(4, 10)  # generates a random number between 4 and 10 (inclusive)
c = random.uniform(4, 10)  # generates a random float between 4 and 10 (inclusive)
d = random.gauss(4, 10) # generates a number from a gaussian (normal) distribution with a mean of 4 and stdev of 10
list1 = [a, b, c, d]
random.shuffle(list1)  # randomizes the elements of a list, copy it first if you want to save the original!
random.choice(list1)  # chooses a random item from the list
```

### Random seed

As we noted, the random numbers you can generate with Python (or any programming language) are not truly random. They are
generated by an algorithm that by default uses the system time to five decimal places as the input and sticks that in a
very funky hard-to-predict equation to get a very hard-to-predict number back out. So this is good if you want very hard
to predict random numbers. But sometimes we want to be able to replicate analyses we do using random numbers. This is
where a random "seed" comes in. The seed is the number that is stuck into the funky equation, that by default is the
system time. But you can set the random seed to any number you want, and if you consistently use the same random seed,
then you will consistently get back the same "random" number.

```python
import random

random_int1 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # you won't be able to predict this number

random_seed = 10
random.seed(random_seed)

random_int2 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # this number will be the same every time
random_int3 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # this number will also be the same every time, but not the same as the last one

random.seed()
random_int4 = random.randint(0, 1000)  # you won't be able to predict this number

print(random_int1, random_int2, random_int3, random_int4)
```

One thing to note about random seed is that once you set it to something (or if you use the default system time) if you
ask for 10 random numbers, you get 10 different numbers, not the same random number 10 times. Why is this? Effectively
what happens is that each time you request a new random number, the seed is changed, and so a different number is put
into the funky equation to give you back a random answer. Python automatically changes the seed each time, in a
deterministic way based on the previous random number that you requested. So that is why teh random number is different
each time you ask for a new one, it is actually using a different random seed each time. But that's also why the
sequence of random numbers is the same every time if you set the random seed manually, because each random seed that is
used is chosen deterministically from the one that came before.

There are many more things you can do with the random module, which you can read about here:
https://python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/library/random.html

## The `sys` module

The `sys` module is used to interact with the python interpreter, the actual program that executes your python code.
Below are three things you can do with `sys`, but there are dozens, which you could read about in the documents.

For each of the `sys` functions below, comment what it is doing.

### Quitting a program

There may be times you want to force your program to quit. One common situation is when you are checking to see if some
data is correct, or a user has input something wrong, and you want to stop the program if you notice a problem.

```python
import sys

some_data = [1,2,3,4,5]
if len(some_data) < 10:
    print("ERROR: Your data was supposed to have at least 10 elements. Program terminating.")
    sys.exit()
```

### Getting the memory size of an object

Sometimes you may be curious about how much of your memory a variable is taking up, if you are doing big data analyses
and your computer is running slow.

```python
import sys
x = 100000
big_list = list(range(100000))
size = sys.getsizeof(big_list) # 800056 bytes of memory
```

### Passing command-line arguments to your program

A final thing that `sys` is useful for is passing command line arguments to your program. A common use here is if you
want to specify something like a file name at the time you run a program, without hard-coding it into the program
itself. To do this, we use `sys.argv`:

```python
import sys

argument_list = sys.argv
```

The way this works is that when you run a python script that uses that line, then the name of the script, and anything
you type after the name of the script, get saved in the `sys.argv` variable. So if you typed: `python script.py pizza 1
3.14` when you ran the script, then you would end up with the list:

["script.py", "pizza", "1", "3.14"]

As noted, this is a really useful way for providing information to your program that you may want to vary different
times you run the program, like perhaps what file to use as input. Imagine the survey program you wrote for the last
homework, but also imagine that you had many files of questions, and you wanted to specify which one was used. It is
good for situations like that. (Perhaps somewhat confusingly, the script name itself is considered the first argument.)

Note that this returns a list of strings! If you entered numbers into the command line, and want
them to work as numbers, you need to convert them to floats or ints. 

> [!WARNING] 
> At the risk of stating the obvious, this only works if you run the script from the
> command line. If you try to run your script from an IDE (e.g. pressing the big "Play" button in VS
> Code), it's not going to sit there waiting for you to type something to input as an argument. Run
> the script from the command line to use this feature: `python my_script.py x y z` where x, y, and
> z are placeholders for the arguments you want to pass to the script.

There are many more `sys` functions, which you can read about here: https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html.

## The `os` module

The final module we will discuss here is the `os` module. The `os` module is a way to do operating system dependent
stuff. The most common case is using your python code to do things like make and delete folders, get lists of files in a
directory, and stuff like that.

### Creating and deleting folders and files

```python
import os
os.mkdir("new folder")  # will create a new folder named "new folder" in the directory where the program was run
os.mkdir("/Users/jon/Desktop/new folder") # will create a folder called "new folder" on my desktop

os.rmdir("new folder")  # will delete a folder called "new folder" if it exists in that location
os.remove("some_file.txt") # will delete a file called "some_file.txt" if it exists in that location
```

This won't work if the folder is there, or if the folder isn't empty. You'll get an error.

Say you want to create a folder inside a folder inside a folder, and you have the name of each stored in a string.

```python
folder1 = "music"
folder2 = "classical"
folder3 = "bach"
```

You could concatenate the strings to create a path.

```python
folder_path = folder1 + "/" + folder2 + "/" + folder3
os.mkdir(folder_path)
```

But adding all those slashes is annoying. The os module has a nice function you can use instead.

```python
folder_path = os.path.join(folder1, folder2, folder3)  # folder path will be "music/classical/bach"
os.mkdirs(folder_path)
```

Note that `mkdirs` has an extra "s". If you use `mkdir()` and the music and classical folders didn't exist, you would get an
error. But if you used `mkdirs()` it will create any chain of folders you want to make.

> [!TIP]
> Alternatively, you can use the `pathlib` module (another core Python module) to create the path and perform
> operations on it. When running `.mkdir()`, setting `parents=True` will create all the folders in the path if they
> don't exist, and `exist_ok=True` will not raise an error if the folder already exists.
>
> ```python
> from pathlib import Path
> folder_path = Path(folder1, folder2, folder3)  # folder path will be "music/classical/bach"
> folder_path.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
> ```

### Listing files and directories

There may be times you want to write a program that will read in a bunch of files and do something with all of them.
Like what if we wanted to count and sum the frequencies of words in a bunch of different files? One (bad) way to do this
is to hard-code all of the file names into the program. But that would mean you would need to change the program every
time you changed the files. A better way would be to designate a folder for all the files you want to read, and then get
a list of every file in that folder, and then open them.

```python
import os

data_directory = "my_data"
directory_list = os.listdir(data_directory)

for file_name in directory_list:
    if item[0] is not ".":
        process_file(os.path.join(data_directory,file_name))
```

In the code above, the `os.listdir()` function gives you back a list of every file in that folder. One important thing
to remember is that will include hidden files in that directory, which most operating systems begin with a ".". The if
statement above checks to see if the file name starts with a ".", and if it does not, calls some function would process
that file, and passes it the path to that file so it can be opened.

There is a whole lot more you can do with the os module, which you can read about here:
https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html

Next: [5.1. Installing Modules with Pip](5.1.%20Installing%20Modules%20with%20pip.md)<br>
Previous: [4.4. Lab 4](../CH04/4.4.%20Lab%204.md)
