ebook/CH05/5.1. Installing Modules with uv.md, before:

# 5.1 Installing modules with `uv`

As noted in [Chapter 0.4](../CH00/0.0.%20Installing%20Python.md), we'll use
[`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) to manage the Python packages we'll use in our projects. That chapter covers how to install `uv` and create your class project, so revisit that chapter if you need to in order get started with `uv`.

Below we'll go through the steps to install a new module with `uv`.

## Step 1: Make sure `uv` is installed

Let's verify your installation of `uv`. Open the terminal and run the following command:

```bash
uv --version
```

If that successfully prints a version number, you are good to go. Mine prints `uv 0.7.3 (3c413f74b
2025-05-07)` but it's okay if you're using a different version.

## Step 2: Installing a new module with `uv`

First, ensure that you are currently in your project folder. That is, your terminal window's current
working directoy should be your project folder (i.e., the one that contains a `pyproject.toml` file
created by `uv init`). Then you can install a new package, like `numpy`, with:

```bash
uv add numpy
```

This installs `numpy` into your project environment and automatically records it as a dependency of
the project, making recreating the same environment later easy and reproducible.

### Step 3: Verify that your installation worked

One quick way is to run Python _through uv_, import `numpy`, and print the version number.
Copy-paste and run the below code in your terminal:

```bash
uv run python -c "import numpy; print(numpy.__version__)"
```

Again, if you see that it successfully ran and printed a version number, you're golden. If you get
an error like `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'numpy'`, double-check that you ran
`uv add numpy` from inside the correct project folder!

> [!TIP]
>
> ### Running Python code inline
>
> We just ran a little Python script inline. The `-c` flag tells Python to execute the code passed
> to it as a string. Semicolons are used here to separate valid statements, rather
> than using new lines.

Next: [5.2. Numpy](5.2.%20Numpy.md)<br>
Previous: [5.0 Core Python Modules](5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)

Commit message:

Update 5.1 with new troubleshooting section

ebook/CH05/5.1. Installing Modules with uv.md, after:

# 5.1 Installing modules with `uv`

As noted in [Chapter 0.4](../CH00/0.0.%20Installing%20Python.md), we'll use
[`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) to manage the Python packages we'll use in our projects. That chapter covers how to install `uv` and create your class project, so revisit that chapter if you need to in order get started with `uv`.

Below we'll go through the steps to install a new module with `uv`.

## Step 1: Make sure `uv` is installed

Let's verify your installation of `uv`. Open the terminal and run the following command:

```bash
uv --version
```

If that successfully prints a version number, you are good to go. Mine prints `uv 0.7.3 (3c413f74b
2025-05-07)` but it's okay if you're using a different version.

## Step 2: Installing a new module with `uv`

First, ensure that you are currently in your project folder. That is, your terminal window's current
working directoy should be your project folder (i.e., the one that contains a `pyproject.toml` file
created by `uv init`). Then you can install a new package, like `numpy`, with:

```bash
uv add numpy
```

This installs `numpy` into your project environment and automatically records it as a dependency of
the project, making recreating the same environment later easy and reproducible.

### Step 3: Verify that your installation worked

One quick way is to run Python _through uv_, import `numpy`, and print the version number.
Copy-paste and run the below code in your terminal:

```bash
uv run python -c "import numpy; print(numpy.__version__)"
```

Again, if you see that it successfully ran and printed a version number, you're
golden. If you get an error like `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'numpy'`,
double-check that you ran `uv add numpy` from inside the correct project folder!
If you managed to successfully install numpy, feel free to move onto the next
section.

> [!TIP]
>
> ### Running Python code inline
>
> We just ran a little Python script inline. The `-c` flag tells Python to execute the code passed
> to it as a string. Semicolons are used here to separate valid statements, rather
> than using new lines.

### Troublshooting installation issues

If you didn't manage to install numpy, this section will go over some of the
issues encountered by past students and how to fix them.

#### Windows: `os error 396` or `os error 32`

This can be remedied by (1) moving your project folder out of cloud storage
(like OneDrive) and (2) using the `--link-mode=copy` argument when trying to
install things with uv. So try the following to get numpy installed:

`uv add numpy --link-mode=copy`

Next: [5.2. Numpy](5.2.%20Numpy.md)<br>
Previous: [5.0 Core Python Modules](5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)
