ebook/CH05/5.4. Numpy Operations.md, before:

# 5.4. NumPy operations

## Iterating over arrays

We've already shown that you can iterate over an array the same way you do a list. This applies to multidimensional
arrays as well. If you want to iterate through every dimension, you just need a different embedded `for` loop for each
dimension:

```python
import numpy as np

x = np.ones([2, 3, 4])

counter = 0

for i in range(x.shape[0]):
    counter += 100
    for j in range(x.shape[1]):
        counter += 10
        for k in range(x.shape[2]):
            counter += 1
            x[i, j, k] = counter

print(x)
```

With the output:

```text
[[[111. 112. 113. 114.]
  [125. 126. 127. 128.]
  [139. 140. 141. 142.]]

 [[253. 254. 255. 256.]
  [267. 268. 269. 270.]
  [281. 282. 283. 284.]]]
```

## Searching NumPy Arrays

You can search for values in a NumPy array and get the indexes where the value occurs:

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10])
indexes1 = np.where(array1==3)  # will give you a numpy array of size 1 with [2] in it
indexes2 = np.where(array1==10)  # will give you a numpy array of size 2 with [9,10] in it

array_list = np.array_split(array1, 2)  # split into 2 arrays: [array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]), array([7, 8, 9, 10, 10])]
```

You can do the same but looking for `min` or `max` values. You can get the value or the index:

```python
import numpy as np
array1 = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10])

min_value = np.min(array1) # will give you 1
min_index = np.argmin(array1)  # will give you 0, the first index where the max value occurred

max_value = np.max(array1) # will give you 10
max_index = np.argmax(array1)  # will give you 9, the first index where the max value occurred
```

## Sorting NumPy Arrays

You can sort NumPy arrays, and specify an axis that you want to sort along.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 4, 6, 2, 10, 3, 7, 9, 5, 8])
array2 = np.array([[10, 8, 9, 1, 2], [7, 6, 3, 5, 4]])

sorted_array1 = np.sort(array1)

sorted_array2 = np.sort(array2)
# result is sorted_array2 = array([[ 1, 2, 8, 9, 10], [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]])
# sorts the inner-most dimension only, Same as axis=1

sorted_array2_rows = np.sort(array2, axis=0)
# result is sorted_array2_rows = array([[7, 6, 3, 1, 2], [10, 8, 9, 5, 4]])
# sorts the outer-most dimension only, (e.g. compared 10 vs. 7; 8 vs. 6; 9 vs 3; 1 vs. 5; 2 vs. 4)

sorted_array2_columns = np.sort(array2, axis=1)
# result is sorted_array2_columns = array([[ 1, 2, 8, 9, 10], [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]])
# sorts the inner-most dimension only

sorted_array2_flattened = np.sort(array2, axis=None)
# result is sorted_array2_flattened = array([ 1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10])

sorted_array2_both_dims1 = np.sort(np.sort(array2, axis=0), axis=1)
# result is sorted_array2_both_dims1 = array([[ 1, 2, 3, 6, 7], [ 4, 5, 8, 9, 10]])

sorted_array2_both_dims2 = np.sort(np.sort(array2, axis=1), axis=0)
# result is sorted_array2_both_dims1 = array([[ 1, 2, 5, 6, 7], [ 3, 4, 8, 9, 10]])
```

Remember the hint that the axis you specify is effectively the one that is left alone.

## Arithmetic, matrix algebra, and statistics with NumPy

NumPy has its own built-in functions for all the same math stuff we covered in the core Python modules (e.g., `sin`,
`cos`, `log`, `ceiling`, `floor`, etc.). We won't cover that again, but you can see the NumPy syntax for these here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.24/reference/routines.math.html

### Simple matrix arithmetic

If you add, subtract, multiply or divide a number by a NumPy array, it will do it to every element:

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 4, 8, 16])

array2 = array1 + 10  # result is np.array([11, 12, 14, 18, 26])
array3 = array1 - 20  # result is np.array([-19, -18, -16, -12, -4])
array4 = array1 * 20  # result is np.array([20, 40, 80, 160, 320])
array5 = array1 ** 2  # result is np.array([1, 4, 16, 64, 256])
```

You can add, subtract, and multiply matrices without needing to use loops (which is much faster in terms of processing
time):

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([[1, 2, 4, 8, 16], [-1, -2, -4, -8, -16]])
array2 = np.array([[1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [-1, -2, -3, -4, -5]])

array3 = array1 + array2  # array([[2, 4, 7, 12, 21], [-2, -4, -7, -12, -21]])
array4 = array1 / array2  # array([[1, 4, 12, 32, 80], [1, 4, 12, 32, 80]])
```

Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division take place element-by-element.

### Matrix algebra

In addition to basic arithmetic, you can do matrix algebra like compute inner and outer products and all that fun stuff.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 4, 8])
array2 = np.array([-1, 1, 0, 0.5])

dot_product = np.dot(array1, array2)  # result is 5.0 = (1*-1) + (2*1) + (4*0) + (8*0.5)

outer_product = np.outer(array1, array2)
'''
each column is array1 multiplied by each corresponding value of array2
column1 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * -1, column2 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 1, column3 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 0, column4 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 0.5
array([[-1. ,  1. ,  0. ,  0.5],
       [-2. ,  2. ,  0. ,  1. ],
       [-4. ,  4. ,  0. ,  2. ],
       [-8. ,  8. ,  0. ,  4. ]])
'''
```

There is of course much much more matrix algebra you can do, which you can see here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.24/reference/routines.linalg.html

### Statistics

What NumPy really excels at are all the operations you might want to compute on a vector of numbers. We can compute
means and standard deviations (stdevs) just like with lists, but it's much faster.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([[1, 11, 21, 31, 41],
                   [2, 22, 42, 62, 82],
                   [3,  6,  9, 12, 15],
                   [6, 12, 18, 24, 30],
                   [2,  4,  8, 16, 32],
                   [4,  8, 16, 32, 64]])

print(array1.sum())  # 636, the sum of the entire matrix
print(array1.sum(axis=0))  # [18 63 114 177 264], the sum of the columns
print(array1.sum(axis=1))  # [105 210  45  90  62 124], the sum of the rows

print(array1.mean())  # 21.1, the mean of the entire matrix
print(array1.mean(axis=0))  # [3. 10.5 19. 29.5 44.], the mean of the columns
print(array1.mean(axis=1))  # [21. 42.  9. 18. 12.4 24.8], the mean of the rows

print(array1.std())  # 19.86353442869622, the standard deviation of the entire matrix
print(array1.std(axis=0))  # [1.63299316 5.82380174 11.28420725 16.2455122 22.4870333], the stdev of the columns
print(array1.std(axis=1))  # [14.14213562 28.28427125 4.24264069 8.4852814 10.9105454 21.8210907] the stdev of the rows

print(np.corrcoef(array1))  # computes the correlation coefficient of every row with every other row in a numpy matrix
print(np.polyfit(array1[:,0], array1[:,1]), 1) # computes a line of best fit
```

The `np.corrcoef()` function gives you back a matrix with 6 rows and 6 columns, because there were 6 rows in the original
matrix. Each row of the result shows you the correlation of that row from the original matrix, with every other row.

The `np.polyfit()` function takes two 1D arrays, and calculates the line or curve that best fits those arrays if you
imagine them as x-values and y-values on a scatterplot (like a correlation). The third argument is the dimensionality of
the line or curve you can use to fit the data. Use 1 as above for a line (like linear regression), `y = b0 + x*b1`; a 2
would be a quadratic function: `y = b0 + b1*x1 + b2*x2**2`; a 3 would be a cubic function: `y = b0 + b1*x1 + b2*x1**2 + b3*x1**3`.
Polyfit returns the values of the parameters (the set of b variables) that best fit the data. For a line, you get back two
variables (b0 and b1), for a quadratic function you get 3, for a cubic function you get 4, etc.

## Random numbers in NumPy

The last issue we want to cover with NumPy is how to use it to generate random numbers. We find this really useful when
doing simulations of all sorts.

Remember that you can create a NumPy array full of zeros or ones? NumPy random numbers basically work the same way,
except that instead of a constant value, you can use random numbers.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.random.random(20)  # generates an array of 20 random floats between 0 and 1
array2 = np.random.random(20)*10  # # generates an array of 20 random floats between 0 and 10
array3 = np.random.randint(1,6, size=[10,20])  # generates a 10x20 matrix of random integers 1 through 6
array4 = np.random.normal(100, 10, size=[4,10])  # generates a 4x10 matrix of random floats with mean=100, std=10
```

You can set the seed for the random number generator, which is useful if you want to generate the same random numbers every time you run your code.

```python
import numpy as np

np.random.seed(12345)
array1 = np.random.random(20)
```

You can also create separate random number generators for different parts of your code.

```python
import numpy as np

rng = np.random.default_rng(12345)
array1 = rng.random(20)

rng2 = np.random.default_rng(678910)
array2 = rng2.random(20)
```

There are many more random distributions and functions, which you can see here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.16/reference/routines.random.html

Next: [5.5. Image processing](5.5.%20Image%20Processing.md)<br>
Previous: [5.3 Manipulating Numpy Arrays](5.3.%20Manipulating%20Numpy%20Arrays.md)

Commit message:

Update 5.4 to also talk about clipping values

ebook/CH05/5.4. Numpy Operations.md, after:

# 5.4. NumPy operations

## Iterating over arrays

We've already shown that you can iterate over an array the same way you do a list. This applies to multidimensional
arrays as well. If you want to iterate through every dimension, you just need a different embedded `for` loop for each
dimension:

```python
import numpy as np

x = np.ones([2, 3, 4])

counter = 0

for i in range(x.shape[0]):
    counter += 100
    for j in range(x.shape[1]):
        counter += 10
        for k in range(x.shape[2]):
            counter += 1
            x[i, j, k] = counter

print(x)
```

With the output:

```text
[[[111. 112. 113. 114.]
  [125. 126. 127. 128.]
  [139. 140. 141. 142.]]

 [[253. 254. 255. 256.]
  [267. 268. 269. 270.]
  [281. 282. 283. 284.]]]
```

## Searching NumPy Arrays

You can search for values in a NumPy array and get the indexes where the value occurs:

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10])
indexes1 = np.where(array1==3)  # will give you a numpy array of size 1 with [2] in it
indexes2 = np.where(array1==10)  # will give you a numpy array of size 2 with [9,10] in it

array_list = np.array_split(array1, 2)  # split into 2 arrays: [array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]), array([7, 8, 9, 10, 10])]
```

You can do the same but looking for `min` or `max` values. You can get the value or the index:

```python
import numpy as np
array1 = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10])

min_value = np.min(array1) # will give you 1
min_index = np.argmin(array1)  # will give you 0, the first index where the max value occurred

max_value = np.max(array1) # will give you 10
max_index = np.argmax(array1)  # will give you 9, the first index where the max value occurred
```

## Sorting NumPy Arrays

You can sort NumPy arrays, and specify an axis that you want to sort along.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 4, 6, 2, 10, 3, 7, 9, 5, 8])
array2 = np.array([[10, 8, 9, 1, 2], [7, 6, 3, 5, 4]])

sorted_array1 = np.sort(array1)

sorted_array2 = np.sort(array2)
# result is sorted_array2 = array([[ 1, 2, 8, 9, 10], [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]])
# sorts the inner-most dimension only, Same as axis=1

sorted_array2_rows = np.sort(array2, axis=0)
# result is sorted_array2_rows = array([[7, 6, 3, 1, 2], [10, 8, 9, 5, 4]])
# sorts the outer-most dimension only, (e.g. compared 10 vs. 7; 8 vs. 6; 9 vs 3; 1 vs. 5; 2 vs. 4)

sorted_array2_columns = np.sort(array2, axis=1)
# result is sorted_array2_columns = array([[ 1, 2, 8, 9, 10], [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]])
# sorts the inner-most dimension only

sorted_array2_flattened = np.sort(array2, axis=None)
# result is sorted_array2_flattened = array([ 1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10])

sorted_array2_both_dims1 = np.sort(np.sort(array2, axis=0), axis=1)
# result is sorted_array2_both_dims1 = array([[ 1, 2, 3, 6, 7], [ 4, 5, 8, 9, 10]])

sorted_array2_both_dims2 = np.sort(np.sort(array2, axis=1), axis=0)
# result is sorted_array2_both_dims1 = array([[ 1, 2, 5, 6, 7], [ 3, 4, 8, 9, 10]])
```

Remember the hint that the axis you specify is effectively the one that is left alone.

## Arithmetic, matrix algebra, and statistics with NumPy

NumPy has its own built-in functions for all the same math stuff we covered in the core Python modules (e.g., `sin`,
`cos`, `log`, `ceiling`, `floor`, etc.). We won't cover that again, but you can see the NumPy syntax for these here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.24/reference/routines.math.html

### Simple matrix arithmetic

If you add, subtract, multiply or divide a number by a NumPy array, it will do it to every element:

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 4, 8, 16])

array2 = array1 + 10  # result is np.array([11, 12, 14, 18, 26])
array3 = array1 - 20  # result is np.array([-19, -18, -16, -12, -4])
array4 = array1 * 20  # result is np.array([20, 40, 80, 160, 320])
array5 = array1 ** 2  # result is np.array([1, 4, 16, 64, 256])
```

You can add, subtract, and multiply matrices without needing to use loops (which is much faster in terms of processing
time):

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([[1, 2, 4, 8, 16], [-1, -2, -4, -8, -16]])
array2 = np.array([[1, 2, 3, 4, 5], [-1, -2, -3, -4, -5]])

array3 = array1 + array2  # array([[2, 4, 7, 12, 21], [-2, -4, -7, -12, -21]])
array4 = array1 / array2  # array([[1, 4, 12, 32, 80], [1, 4, 12, 32, 80]])
```

Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division take place element-by-element.

### Matrix algebra

In addition to basic arithmetic, you can do matrix algebra like compute inner and outer products and all that fun stuff.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([1, 2, 4, 8])
array2 = np.array([-1, 1, 0, 0.5])

dot_product = np.dot(array1, array2)  # result is 5.0 = (1*-1) + (2*1) + (4*0) + (8*0.5)

outer_product = np.outer(array1, array2)
'''
each column is array1 multiplied by each corresponding value of array2
column1 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * -1, column2 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 1, column3 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 0, column4 = [1, 2, 4, 8] * 0.5
array([[-1. ,  1. ,  0. ,  0.5],
       [-2. ,  2. ,  0. ,  1. ],
       [-4. ,  4. ,  0. ,  2. ],
       [-8. ,  8. ,  0. ,  4. ]])
'''
```

There is of course much much more matrix algebra you can do, which you can see here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.24/reference/routines.linalg.html

### Statistics

What NumPy really excels at are all the operations you might want to compute on a vector of numbers. We can compute
means and standard deviations (stdevs) just like with lists, but it's much faster.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.array([[1, 11, 21, 31, 41],
                   [2, 22, 42, 62, 82],
                   [3,  6,  9, 12, 15],
                   [6, 12, 18, 24, 30],
                   [2,  4,  8, 16, 32],
                   [4,  8, 16, 32, 64]])

print(array1.sum())  # 636, the sum of the entire matrix
print(array1.sum(axis=0))  # [18 63 114 177 264], the sum of the columns
print(array1.sum(axis=1))  # [105 210  45  90  62 124], the sum of the rows

print(array1.mean())  # 21.1, the mean of the entire matrix
print(array1.mean(axis=0))  # [3. 10.5 19. 29.5 44.], the mean of the columns
print(array1.mean(axis=1))  # [21. 42.  9. 18. 12.4 24.8], the mean of the rows

print(array1.std())  # 19.86353442869622, the standard deviation of the entire matrix
print(array1.std(axis=0))  # [1.63299316 5.82380174 11.28420725 16.2455122 22.4870333], the stdev of the columns
print(array1.std(axis=1))  # [14.14213562 28.28427125 4.24264069 8.4852814 10.9105454 21.8210907] the stdev of the rows

print(np.corrcoef(array1))  # computes the correlation coefficient of every row with every other row in a numpy matrix
print(np.polyfit(array1[:,0], array1[:,1]), 1) # computes a line of best fit
```

The `np.corrcoef()` function gives you back a matrix with 6 rows and 6 columns, because there were 6 rows in the original
matrix. Each row of the result shows you the correlation of that row from the original matrix, with every other row.

The `np.polyfit()` function takes two 1D arrays, and calculates the line or curve that best fits those arrays if you
imagine them as x-values and y-values on a scatterplot (like a correlation). The third argument is the dimensionality of
the line or curve you can use to fit the data. Use 1 as above for a line (like linear regression), `y = b0 + x*b1`; a 2
would be a quadratic function: `y = b0 + b1*x1 + b2*x2**2`; a 3 would be a cubic function: `y = b0 + b1*x1 + b2*x1**2 + b3*x1**3`.
Polyfit returns the values of the parameters (the set of b variables) that best fit the data. For a line, you get back two
variables (b0 and b1), for a quadratic function you get 3, for a cubic function you get 4, etc.

## Random numbers in NumPy

The last issue we want to cover with NumPy is how to use it to generate random numbers. We find this really useful when
doing simulations of all sorts.

Remember that you can create a NumPy array full of zeros or ones? NumPy random numbers basically work the same way,
except that instead of a constant value, you can use random numbers.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.random.random(20)  # generates an array of 20 random floats between 0 and 1
array2 = np.random.random(20)*10  # # generates an array of 20 random floats between 0 and 10
array3 = np.random.randint(1,6, size=[10,20])  # generates a 10x20 matrix of random integers 1 through 6
array4 = np.random.normal(100, 10, size=[4,10])  # generates a 4x10 matrix of random floats with mean=100, std=10
```

You can set the seed for the random number generator, which is useful if you want to generate the same random numbers every time you run your code.

```python
import numpy as np

np.random.seed(12345)
array1 = np.random.random(20)
```

You can also create separate random number generators for different parts of your code.

```python
import numpy as np

rng = np.random.default_rng(12345)
array1 = rng.random(20)

rng2 = np.random.default_rng(678910)
array2 = rng2.random(20)
```

We can also "clip" the random numbers to be within a certain range, ensuring that there are no numbers that fall below a certain value or above another certain value.

```python
import numpy as np

array1 = np.random.randint(0, 10, size=[10, 20])
array2 = np.clip(array1, 2, 7) # clips all values in array1 to be between 2 and 7
```

There are many more random distributions and functions, which you can see here:
https://numpy.org/doc/1.16/reference/routines.random.html

Next: [5.5. Image processing](5.5.%20Image%20Processing.md)<br>
Previous: [5.3 Manipulating Numpy Arrays](5.3.%20Manipulating%20Numpy%20Arrays.md)
