ebook/CH05/5.5. Image processing.md, before:

# 5.5. Image processing

In my day to day work, I do a lot of image processing. One of my go-to tools is the Python Imaging Library (PIL), now
maintained as the `Pillow` fork. This is a powerful library for opening, manipulating, and saving image files. It
supports many common image formats including PNG, JPEG, BMP, and TIFF, and generally makes working with images
in Python much easier.

## Installing PIL

First, you'll need to install PIL using pip or conda (depending on how you installed Python):

```bash
pip3 install pillow # pip may also work instead of pip3
```

or

```bash
conda install pillow
```

## Opening and displaying images

To work with images in PIL, first import the library and open an image. Note that the library is not called "pillow"
but "PIL" when importing.

```python
from PIL import Image

# Open an image file
img = Image.open("path/to/your/image.jpg")

# Display basic image information
print(f"Format: {img.format}")
print(f"Size: {img.size}")
print(f"Mode: {img.mode}")

# Display the image (opens in your default image viewer)
img.show()
```

## Basic image operations

PIL provides many basic operations for image manipulation, including resizing, rotating, cropping, and converting to
grayscale.

```python
from PIL import Image

# Open image
img = Image.open("input.jpg")

# Resize image
resized_img = img.resize((800, 600))  # specify width, height

# Rotate image
rotated_img = img.rotate(90)  # degrees

# Crop image
# Specify left, top, right, bottom coordinates
# The top left corner is (0, 0), while the bottom right corner is (width, height)
cropped_img = img.crop((100, 100, 400, 400))

# Convert to grayscale -- L means grayscale
grayscale_img = img.convert("L")

# Flip the image
flipped_horizontal = img.transpose(Image.FLIP_LEFT_RIGHT)
flipped_vertical = img.transpose(Image.FLIP_TOP_BOTTOM)

# Save modified images
resized_img.save("resized.jpg")
rotated_img.save("rotated.jpg")
cropped_img.save("cropped.jpg")
grayscale_img.save("grayscale.jpg")
flipped_horizontal.save("flipped_horizontal.jpg")
flipped_vertical.save("flipped_vertical.jpg")
```

## Image enhancement and filters

PIL includes various filters and enhancement options that would be familiar to anyone who has used a photo editor like
Photoshop or GIMP.

```python
from PIL import Image, ImageEnhance, ImageFilter

img = Image.open("input.jpg")

# Adjust brightness
enhancer = ImageEnhance.Brightness(img)
brightened = enhancer.enhance(1.5)  # 1.0 is original, <1 darkens, >1 brightens

# Adjust contrast
enhancer = ImageEnhance.Contrast(img)
increased_contrast = enhancer.enhance(1.5)

# Apply blur filter
blurred = img.filter(ImageFilter.BLUR)

# Apply edge detection
edges = img.filter(ImageFilter.FIND_EDGES)

# Sharpen image
sharpened = img.filter(ImageFilter.SHARPEN)

# Save enhanced images
brightened.save("bright.jpg")
increased_contrast.save("contrast.jpg")
blurred.save("blur.jpg")
edges.save("edges.jpg")
sharpened.save("sharp.jpg")
```

## Drawing on images

You can also draw shapes and text directly onto images using PIL.

```python
from PIL import Image, ImageDraw, ImageFont

# Create a new image with white background
img = Image.new("RGB", (400, 300), color="white")

# Create drawing object
draw = ImageDraw.Draw(img)

# Draw shapes
draw.rectangle([100, 100, 300, 200], outline="black", fill="red")
draw.ellipse([150, 50, 250, 150], outline="blue", fill="yellow")
draw.line([0, 0, 400, 300], fill="green", width=3)

# Add text
try:
    # Try to load a system font
    font = ImageFont.truetype("Arial.ttf", 36)
except:
    # Fall back to default font
    font = ImageFont.load_default()

draw.text((50, 250), "Hello, PIL!", fill="black", font=font)

# Save the result
img.save("drawing.jpg")
```

You could imagine using this to add text to images in a loop, for example, to add a timestamp to each image in a series,
or perform other forms of watermarking. You could even make your own meme generator — the possibilities are endless!

## Working with image data

If you need to make targeted edits to an image, you can do that as well by accessing and modifying image data directly.

```python
from PIL import Image
import numpy as np

# Open image and convert to numpy array
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
img_array = np.array(img)

# Modify pixel values
# Example: Make image darker by reducing all RGB values by 50
darker_array = np.clip(img_array - 50, 0, 255)

# Convert back to PIL Image
darker_img = Image.fromarray(darker_array.astype("uint8"))
darker_img.save("darker.jpg")

# Get individual pixel values
pixel = img.getpixel((100, 100))  # Gets pixel at x=100, y=100
print(f"Pixel value at (100,100): {pixel}")
```

## Common pitfalls and tips

Keep in mind that when you `open()` something in Python (or anything, really), you're using system resources to keep it
open. You need to `close()` it when you're done with it to free up those resources so your computer doesn't run as slow
as molasses:

```python
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
# ... process image ...
img.close()
```

You can use _context managers_ to help you with this, as they automatically clean up after themselves:

```python
with Image.open("input.jpg") as img:
    # ... process image ...
    img.save("output.jpg")

# image is automatically closed when the block is exited!
```

Some methods modify the original object in place (like `my_list.append(new_item)`), while others return a new object
(like `sorted(my_list)`). Most PIL operations return new `Image` objects and don't modify the original:

```python
# This won't work as expected:
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
img.rotate(45)  # This creates a new image but doesn't store it in a variable, so it's lost
img.save("rotated.jpg")  # Oops! Saves the original, unrotated image

# Do this instead:
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
rotated = img.rotate(45)  # Store the new image in a new variable
rotated.save("rotated.jpg")  # This saves the rotated image
```

PIL is a powerful library with many more features than covered here. For more detailed information, you can refer to the official documentation: https://pillow.readthedocs.io/

Commit message:

Update 5.5 add description of how images are represented in computers

ebook/CH05/5.5. Image processing.md, after:

# 5.5. Image processing

In my day to day work, I do a lot of image processing. One of my go-to tools is the Python Imaging Library (PIL), now
maintained as the `Pillow` fork. This is a powerful library for opening, manipulating, and saving image files. It
supports many common image formats including PNG, JPEG, BMP, and TIFF, and generally makes working with images
in Python much easier.

## Installing PIL

First, you'll need to install PIL using pip or conda (depending on how you installed Python):

```bash
pip3 install pillow # pip may also work instead of pip3
```

or

```bash
conda install pillow
```

## Opening and displaying images

To work with images in PIL, first import the library and open an image. Note that the library is not called "pillow"
but "PIL" when importing.

```python
from PIL import Image

# Open an image file
img = Image.open("path/to/your/image.jpg")

# Display basic image information
print(f"Format: {img.format}")
print(f"Size: {img.size}")
print(f"Mode: {img.mode}")

# Display the image (opens in your default image viewer)
img.show()
```

## How are images represented in memory?

Your computer represents images as a grid of pixels, which are the individual squares that make up the image. Images are, of course, two-dimensional, but each pixel also has a color, which is a combination of red, green, and blue (RGB) values. This means that a given image is really just a grid of numbers that can be represented as a matrix. This matrix is an M x N x 3 tensor, where M is the height of the image, N is the width, and 3 is for the different RGB values. So an image that is 100 pixels wide and 100 pixels tall is represented as a matrix that is 100 x 100 x 3 values in size.

## Basic image operations

PIL provides many basic operations for image manipulation, including resizing, rotating, cropping, and converting to
grayscale.

```python
from PIL import Image

# Open image
img = Image.open("input.jpg")

# Resize image
resized_img = img.resize((800, 600))  # specify width, height

# Rotate image
rotated_img = img.rotate(90)  # degrees

# Crop image
# Specify left, top, right, bottom coordinates
# The top left corner is (0, 0), while the bottom right corner is (width, height)
cropped_img = img.crop((100, 100, 400, 400))

# Convert to grayscale -- L means grayscale
grayscale_img = img.convert("L")

# Flip the image
flipped_horizontal = img.transpose(Image.FLIP_LEFT_RIGHT)
flipped_vertical = img.transpose(Image.FLIP_TOP_BOTTOM)

# Save modified images
resized_img.save("resized.jpg")
rotated_img.save("rotated.jpg")
cropped_img.save("cropped.jpg")
grayscale_img.save("grayscale.jpg")
flipped_horizontal.save("flipped_horizontal.jpg")
flipped_vertical.save("flipped_vertical.jpg")
```

## Image enhancement and filters

PIL includes various filters and enhancement options that would be familiar to anyone who has used a photo editor like
Photoshop or GIMP.

```python
from PIL import Image, ImageEnhance, ImageFilter

img = Image.open("input.jpg")

# Adjust brightness
enhancer = ImageEnhance.Brightness(img)
brightened = enhancer.enhance(1.5)  # 1.0 is original, <1 darkens, >1 brightens

# Adjust contrast
enhancer = ImageEnhance.Contrast(img)
increased_contrast = enhancer.enhance(1.5)

# Apply blur filter
blurred = img.filter(ImageFilter.BLUR)

# Apply edge detection
edges = img.filter(ImageFilter.FIND_EDGES)

# Sharpen image
sharpened = img.filter(ImageFilter.SHARPEN)

# Save enhanced images
brightened.save("bright.jpg")
increased_contrast.save("contrast.jpg")
blurred.save("blur.jpg")
edges.save("edges.jpg")
sharpened.save("sharp.jpg")
```

## Drawing on images

You can also draw shapes and text directly onto images using PIL.

```python
from PIL import Image, ImageDraw, ImageFont

# Create a new image with white background
img = Image.new("RGB", (400, 300), color="white")

# Create drawing object
draw = ImageDraw.Draw(img)

# Draw shapes
draw.rectangle([100, 100, 300, 200], outline="black", fill="red")
draw.ellipse([150, 50, 250, 150], outline="blue", fill="yellow")
draw.line([0, 0, 400, 300], fill="green", width=3)

# Add text
try:
    # Try to load a system font
    font = ImageFont.truetype("Arial.ttf", 36)
except:
    # Fall back to default font
    font = ImageFont.load_default()

draw.text((50, 250), "Hello, PIL!", fill="black", font=font)

# Save the result
img.save("drawing.jpg")
```

You could imagine using this to add text to images in a loop, for example, to add a timestamp to each image in a series,
or perform other forms of watermarking. You could even make your own meme generator — the possibilities are endless!

## Working with image data

If you need to make targeted edits to an image, you can do that as well by accessing and modifying image data directly.

```python
from PIL import Image
import numpy as np

# Open image and convert to numpy array
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
img_array = np.array(img)

# Modify pixel values
# Example: Make image darker by reducing all RGB values by 50
darker_array = np.clip(img_array - 50, 0, 255)

# Convert back to PIL Image
darker_img = Image.fromarray(darker_array.astype("uint8"))
darker_img.save("darker.jpg")

# Get individual pixel values
pixel = img.getpixel((100, 100))  # Gets pixel at x=100, y=100
print(f"Pixel value at (100,100): {pixel}")
```

## Common pitfalls and tips

Keep in mind that when you `open()` something in Python (or anything, really), you're using system resources to keep it
open. You need to `close()` it when you're done with it to free up those resources so your computer doesn't run as slow
as molasses:

```python
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
# ... process image ...
img.close()
```

You can use _context managers_ to help you with this, as they automatically clean up after themselves:

```python
with Image.open("input.jpg") as img:
    # ... process image ...
    img.save("output.jpg")

# image is automatically closed when the block is exited!
```

Some methods modify the original object in place (like `my_list.append(new_item)`), while others return a new object
(like `sorted(my_list)`). Most PIL operations return new `Image` objects and don't modify the original:

```python
# This won't work as expected:
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
img.rotate(45)  # This creates a new image but doesn't store it in a variable, so it's lost
img.save("rotated.jpg")  # Oops! Saves the original, unrotated image

# Do this instead:
img = Image.open("input.jpg")
rotated = img.rotate(45)  # Store the new image in a new variable
rotated.save("rotated.jpg")  # This saves the rotated image
```

PIL is a powerful library with many more features than covered here. For more detailed information, you can refer to the official documentation: https://pillow.readthedocs.io/
