ebook/CH06/6.0. Classes and OOP.md, before:

# 6.0. Classes and Object-Oriented Programming

We're ready for our last topic in our Python crash course, before we move on to some Brain and Cognitive Science
applications. But first we need to cover classes.

## Object-oriented languages

Python is what is called an _object-oriented language_. This means that the design of Python is organized around objects.
Almost every data structure in Python is an object. Lists, dictionaries, strings, integers, floats, sets - these are all
objects. Objects are data structures that allow you to bundle together variables and functions.

Take lists for example, there is the data in the list, and then there are the functions you can use in the list, like
`.append()` and `.search()`.

Object-oriented languages can be contrasted with _functional languages_. In a functional language, most of the code
exists as functions that get passed objects, but are not themselves a part of the objects.

If you reflect back on what we've been learning, you'll see that almost everything we've learned to do involves objects
and their methods, like `.append()` for lists and `.mean()` for numpy arrays. We have learned about a few functions that
get passed things and don't belong to a specific object, like `print()` and `sum()` and `len()`. But these are actually
pretty rare in Python.

There are pros and cons to object-oriented languages vs. functional languages. If you're interested in learning more
about this, check out this web page: https://www.educative.io/blog/functional-programming-vs-oop

## Creating our own classes

Sometimes when programming we want to create our own special classes to make our code more organized and re-usable.

Creating a class in Python is easy.

```python

class Animal:
    def __init__(self, species):
        self.species = species

my_animal = Animal("dog")
print(my_animal)
print(my_animal.species)
```

Which generates the output:

```text
<__main__.Animal object at 0x101309810>
dog
```

The first print statement is what happens when we print the class itself. This just gives us some difficult to read
information about the name of the class, and some memory information about where it is stored in your RAM (that's the
0x101309810 hexidecimal numbrer). 

Below, let's walk through three other important things about the class definition above.

## Class definitions

When we declare a class, we use the `class` keyword, and then provide the name of our class. Standard Python naming
rules apply (don't start with numbers, no spaces, etc.). When naming a class, a convention is to start it with
upper-case, and to use "PascalCase" (i.e., concatenate words without underscores, and capitalize the start of each
word).

<br>

## Instances of a class

In the line:

```python
my_animal = Animal("dog")
```

we create an instance of the class. Notice how this is very similar to the way we create instances of built in Python
data types:

```python
my_float = float(5)
my_set = set('doggy')
my_array = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
```

In each case we create an instance variable that we name whatever we want, and assign to it the name of the class. When
we create the instance, we can pass it information that the class will use when the instance is created.

<br>

## The `__init__()` function in a class

A class usually has an "init" function, inside it. This is the function that runs when you create an instance of the
class, as we do here. When the instance is created, any code in the init function is run. Think of it like the`main()`
function for that class.


<br>

## Using "self" in classes

The final thing to notice about class definitions is that they use a special kind of variable to denote attributes and
methods that belong to the class. This is the `self` command, which you put before any variable in the class. You can
almost think of `self` as like a dictionary that stores all the data in the class, but instead of accessing the data
using `self[variable_name]`, you use `self.variable_name`. We only use `self` before a variable name inside of a class.
When we are outside a class dealing with one of its instances, we instead use the instance name that we created (in this
case, `my_animal`) and put that before the variable name to access that variable.

The other thing to notice about `self` is that we must pass it into each function inside of a class, as we did in the
`__init__()` function. It must be the first thing we pass to each function within the class.

Next: [6.1. Class Attributes](6.1.%20Class%20Attributes.md)<br>
Previous: [5.5. Lab 5](../CH05/5.5.%20Lab%205.md)

Commit message:

Add section on memory addresses to 6.0

ebook/CH06/6.0. Classes and OOP.md, after:

# 6.0. Classes and Object-Oriented Programming

We're ready for our last topic in our Python crash course, before we move on to some Brain and Cognitive Science
applications. But first we need to cover classes.

## Object-oriented languages

Python is what is called an _object-oriented language_. This means that the design of Python is organized around objects.
Almost every data structure in Python is an object. Lists, dictionaries, strings, integers, floats, sets - these are all
objects. Objects are data structures that allow you to bundle together variables and functions.

Take lists for example, there is the data in the list, and then there are the functions you can use in the list, like
`.append()` and `.search()`.

Object-oriented languages can be contrasted with _functional languages_. In a functional language, most of the code
exists as functions that get passed objects, but are not themselves a part of the objects.

If you reflect back on what we've been learning, you'll see that almost everything we've learned to do involves objects
and their methods, like `.append()` for lists and `.mean()` for numpy arrays. We have learned about a few functions that
get passed things and don't belong to a specific object, like `print()` and `sum()` and `len()`. But these are actually
pretty rare in Python.

There are pros and cons to object-oriented languages vs. functional languages. If you're interested in learning more
about this, check out this web page: https://www.educative.io/blog/functional-programming-vs-oop

## Creating our own classes

Sometimes when programming we want to create our own special classes to make our code more organized and re-usable.

Creating a class in Python is easy.

```python

class Animal:
    def __init__(self, species):
        self.species = species

my_animal = Animal("dog")
print(my_animal)
print(my_animal.species)
```

Which generates the output:

```text
<__main__.Animal object at 0x101309810>
dog
```

The first print statement is what happens when we print the class itself. This just gives us some difficult to read
information about the name of the class, and some memory information about where it is stored in your RAM (that's the
`0x101309810` hexidecimal numbrer).

> [!NOTE] Memory Addresses
>
> RAM, or Random Access Memory, is the part of your computer that stores data temporarily while programs are running.
> When you create a Python object, like the `my_animal` object in the example above, the object is stored in RAM so that
> it can be accessed quickly while the program is running.
>
> Every object in Python, whether it's a number, string, list, or a custom class like `Animal`, is assigned a unique
> location in memory. This location is represented by a memory address, and it's what you see when you print the object
> without a custom string representation—such as `<__main__.Animal object at 0x101309810>`. The `0x101309810` is a
> hexadecimal number that tells you where, in RAM, that object is stored.
>
> This memory address allows Python to quickly reference and manipulate objects without needing to search for them,
> making programs faster and more efficient. When you're done with an object and it's no longer needed, Python's garbage
> collector will eventually remove it from memory to free up space.

Below, let's walk through three other important things about the class definition above.

## Class definitions

When we declare a class, we use the `class` keyword, and then provide the name of our class. Standard Python naming
rules apply (don't start with numbers, no spaces, etc.). When naming a class, a convention is to start it with
upper-case, and to use "PascalCase" (i.e., concatenate words without underscores, and capitalize the start of each
word).

<br>

## Instances of a class

In the line:

```python
my_animal = Animal("dog")
```

we create an instance of the class. Notice how this is very similar to the way we create instances of built in Python
data types:

```python
my_float = float(5)
my_set = set('doggy')
my_array = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
```

In each case we create an instance variable that we name whatever we want, and assign to it the name of the class. When
we create the instance, we can pass it information that the class will use when the instance is created.

<br>

## The `__init__()` function in a class

A class usually has an "init" function, inside it. This is the function that runs when you create an instance of the
class, as we do here. When the instance is created, any code in the init function is run. Think of it like the`main()`
function for that class.


<br>

## Using "self" in classes

The final thing to notice about class definitions is that they use a special kind of variable to denote attributes and
methods that belong to the class. This is the `self` command, which you put before any variable in the class. You can
almost think of `self` as like a dictionary that stores all the data in the class, but instead of accessing the data
using `self[variable_name]`, you use `self.variable_name`. We only use `self` before a variable name inside of a class.
When we are outside a class dealing with one of its instances, we instead use the instance name that we created (in this
case, `my_animal`) and put that before the variable name to access that variable.

The other thing to notice about `self` is that we must pass it into each function inside of a class, as we did in the
`__init__()` function. It must be the first thing we pass to each function within the class.

Next: [6.1. Class Attributes](6.1.%20Class%20Attributes.md)<br>
Previous: [5.5. Lab 5](../CH05/5.5.%20Lab%205.md)
