ebook/CH06/6.3. Class Inheritance.md, before:

# 6.3. Class inheritance

One final issue with classes we want to deal with is called inheritance. Inheritance is the ability to create a class
based on some other class, inheriting all of its properties, and then adding more. This is very useful in programming
when we are designing reusable parts. You make simple parts, and then you can make more complex parts out of the simple
parts while still keeping the simple part in case you want to modify it later.

Here, we define an Animal class that has some basic properties, and one action it can take:

```python
class Animal:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        self.is_alive = True
        self.can_move = True
        self.can_grow = True

    def say_hello(self):
        print(f"\nMy name is {self.name}")
```

Now we are going to create a new class that inherits the Animal class but adds its own properties.

```python
class Bird(Animal):
    def __init__(self, name):
        super().__init__(name)
        self.has_wings = True
        self.has_feathers = True
        self.can_fly = True

    def say_tweet(self):
        print("Tweet, tweet, tweet!")
```

You should notice a couple of things. First, we pass the class we are inheriting from as an input argument into the
class definition. Look at Animal's class definition. It doesn't have an input argument. This is fine. That means it's a
base class. Compare that to Bird, it has Animal as an input argument.

Next, look inside Bird's `__init__()` function. You can see that the first line inside this function is calling Animal's
`__init__()` function. This is the step that gives all of Animal's attributes and methods to the new Bird class.

Now let's look at what happens when we create them.

```python
animal_list = [Animal("Jon"), Bird("Tweety")]

for animal in animal_list:
    animal.say_hello()
    try:
        animal.say_tweet()
    except:
        pass

    for item in animal.__dict__:
        print("\t", item, animal.__dict__[item])
```

As you can see from this code, Tweety the bird inherits all the attributes and functions of animal.

Next: [6.4. Data Classes](6.4.%20Data%20Classes.md)<br>
Previous: [6.2 Class Methods](6.2.%20Class%20Methods.md)

Commit message:

Update 6.3 with more information on super

ebook/CH06/6.3. Class Inheritance.md, after:

# 6.3. Class inheritance

One final issue with classes we want to deal with is called inheritance. Inheritance is the ability to create a class
based on some other class, inheriting all of its properties, and then adding more. This is very useful in programming
when we are designing reusable parts. You make simple parts, and then you can make more complex parts out of the simple
parts while still keeping the simple part in case you want to modify it later.

Here, we define an Animal class that has some basic properties, and one action it can take:

```python
class Animal:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
        self.is_alive = True
        self.can_move = True
        self.can_grow = True

    def say_hello(self):
        print(f"\nMy name is {self.name}")
```

Now we are going to create a new class that inherits the Animal class but adds its own properties.

```python
class Bird(Animal):
    def __init__(self, name):
        super().__init__(name)
        self.has_wings = True
        self.has_feathers = True
        self.can_fly = True

    def say_tweet(self):
        print("Tweet, tweet, tweet!")
```

You should notice a couple of things. First, we pass the class we are inheriting from as an input argument into the
class definition. Look at Animal's class definition. It doesn't have an input argument. This is fine. That means it's a
base class. Compare that to Bird, it has Animal as an input argument.

Next, look inside Bird's `__init__()` function. You can see that the first line inside this function is calling Animal's
`__init__()` function using `super()`. This is the step that gives all of Animal's attributes and methods to the new
Bird class. `super()` doesn't need to know the name of the parent class, as it will find it automatically. It also
doesn't need to pass `self` as an argument, as it will automatically pass the current object to the parent class.

Now let's look at what happens when we create them.

```python
animal_list = [Animal("Jon"), Bird("Tweety")]

for animal in animal_list:
    animal.say_hello()
    try:
        animal.say_tweet()
    except:
        pass

    for item in animal.__dict__:
        print("\t", item, animal.__dict__[item])
```

As you can see from this code, Tweety the bird inherits all the attributes and functions of animal.

Next: [6.4. Data Classes](6.4.%20Data%20Classes.md)<br>
Previous: [6.2 Class Methods](6.2.%20Class%20Methods.md)
