# 6.7 Homework 6

In your second homework assignment, you are going to make a class-based simulation called "Humans vs. Zombies" using the
Turtle module. In this simulation, there will be instances of a Zombie class (zombies) and a Human class (humans).
Humans run around the screen (some smartly, some not so much), and zombies try to chase them down and convert them into
other zombies.

This simulation is a way to practice object-oriented programming, with particular focus on inheritance and polymorphism
(the idea that the same method can have different implementations for different classes).

When complete, you'll see:

- Smart humans (Lisa) actively fleeing from zombies
- Less smart humans (Homer) moving randomly
- Zombies pursuing the nearest human
- Humans turning into zombies when caught

## Setup and requirements

### Files

You will need to download the following files from the textbook repository's `images` folder:

- `homer.gif` — represents the not-so-smart humans
- `lisa.gif` — represents the smart humans
- `zombie.gif` — represents the zombies

### Imports

You may find yourself using other imports (e.g. `os`, `pathlib`, `time`, and so on), but some of the imports you will
definitely need are:

```python
import math
import random
import turtle
```

### Setting up the images

First, register the images as shapes in Turtle at the start of your script, below your imports. Depending on where you
save the files, you may need to adjust the path to the images!

```python
turtle.register_shape("homer.gif")
turtle.register_shape("lisa.gif")
turtle.register_shape("zombie.gif")
```

## Classes

### The Base `Agent` Class

Create a parent `Agent` class that will define the common behavior of all the agents in the simulation (namely, both
humans and zombies). They will both inherit from this class. This class will handle basic movement and placement of the agents (i.e. their turtles).

Below I will list the methods that you must implement in the `Agent` class. You will need to give them the appropriate
parameters, implement their logic, ensure that they return the correct values, and that they are used correctly when
called.

1. `__init__()`

- This method initializes the agent. (Because it is an instance method, it will naturally take `self` as its first argument. This is true of all instance methods.) It should:
  - take the simulation's dimensions as an argument, and save them as an attribute.
  - take an optional `start_position` argument, which should default to `None`. If this argument is provided (i.e., is not `None`),
    the agent should be placed at this position. Otherwise, the agent should be placed at a randomly chosen position within the bounds of the simulation.
  - set the agent's `movement_speed` to be 1
  - create an instance of the `Turtle()` class from the `turtle` module and save it as an attribute (you can call it `turtle` if you like)
  - hide the agent's turtle and puts its pen up.
  - call the `place_agent()` method defined below

2. `place_agent()`

- This method places the agent at a specific position. It should:
  - use the value of the agent's `start_position` attribute (already defined earlier) to decide where to place the agent
    - if a `start_position` is supplied, then move the turtle to that location and show the turtle
    - if a `start_position` is not supplied, then choose a random starting location within the dimensions of the
      simulation, and move the turtle to that position and show the turtle

3. `check_if_legal_move()`

- This method checks if a move is legal. It should:
  - be passed a position as an argument
  - return `True` or `False` based on whether that location is in the simulation dimensions
  - Keep in mind that a Turtle screen has coordinates (0, 0) start at the center of the screen. This means that if you
    have a screen that is, say, 800 pixels wide and 600 pixels tall, the x-coordinates go from -400 to 400 and the y-
    coordinates go from -300 to 300.

4. `take_turn()`

- This method defines the default behavior for all agents on each frame of the simulation. It should:
  - call the `find_move()` and `move()` methods that are defined below

5. `find_move()`

- This method finds a legal move for the agent. It should:
  - use a while loop that loops until a legal move is found:
    - pick a random potential `new_position` based on randomly moving the turtle a distance of `movement_speed()` in
      a randomly chosen direction (aka a random angle)
    - calls the `check_if_legal_move` method (defined above), and passes it the `new_position` as an argument
    - breaks out of the loop if the move is legal
      - You can use boolean sentinels or a `while True` loop with a `break` statement to accomplish this sort of thing —
        see [Chapter 2.3 Continue and Break](../CH02/2.3.%20Continue%20and%20Break.md) for a refresher.
  - returns the (legal) `new_position`

6. `move()`

- This method moves the turtle to the new position. It should:
  - take a `new_position` as an argument
  - move the turtle to the `new_position`

### The `Zombie` Class

Next, you will create a `Zombie` class that inherits from the `Agent` class. Zombies actively pursue the human closest to them.

The `Zombie` class should have the following methods:

1. `__init__()`:

- calls its parent's init function (hint: you can do this by using `super()`). This will run all the logic defined in the parent class's `__init__()` method.
- sets the image of the turtle to the zombie image (which you registered at the top of the file)
- creates the attribute `attack_range` and sets it to 10

2. `take_turn()`

- This is just like the parent's move function, except that, in addition to
  doing whatever the parent's move function does, it also:
  - takes a list of humans as an argument
  - calls the `find_move()` method defined below
  - also performs an `attack()` (more details below — we'll come back to this) and returns any new zombie created from a successful attack

3. `find_move()`

- This is just like the parent's find_move function, except that its behavior is a little more intelligent: instead of moving `movement_speed` units in a random
  direction, the zombie moves up to `movement_speed` units in the direction of the closest human. Note: this returns a position, and does not move the turtle itself. That will be handled in the `move()` method.
  - take a list of humans as an argument
  - Use that list of humans to figure out which human is the closest...
  - If the closest human is less than movement_speed units away, then return the closest human's exact location. Make sure to check that the zombie's move is legal using the parent's `check_if_legal_move` method.
  - Otherwise, return a position in the direction of the closest human, but only by `movement_speed` units.

4. `attack()`

- This method is responsible for converting nearby humans into zombies. It should:

  - take a list of humans as an argument (let's call it `human_list`)
  - check to see if a human from the `human_list` is within `attack_range` distance
  - if a human is in range, delete that human from the `human_list`, and return a new zombie object at the (now deleted)
    human's exact location, otherwise return `None`

### The `Human` Class

Create a `Human` class derived from the `Agent` class. Humans can either be "smart" (Lisa) or "not smart" (Homer). It should have the following methods:

- `__init__()`:
  - calls its parent's init function (hint: you can do this by using `super()`)
  - sets the attribute `movement_speed` to 2
  - randomly sets the attribute `smart` to `True` or `False`
  - sets the image of the turtle to a picture of Homer Simpson if not `smart`, and Lisa Simpson if `smart`
- `find_move()`:
  - takes in a `zombie_list` as an argument (which will be used to find the closest zombie further down)
  - if not `smart`, moves the human to a random legal location of distance `movement_speed` away, _just like its parent class_
  - otherwise, if it is `smart`, it should move a distance of `movement_speed` in the _opposite direction_ of the
    closest zombie, if that is a legal move, otherwise it should move to a random legal location of `movement_speed` distance away.
    (Hint: this will require that you calculate the distance between the human and every other zombie in the `zombie_list`, then choose the zombie with the smallest distance.)
- `take_turn()`:

  - is like the parent's, except it also takes in a `zombie_list` as an argument, in order for the human to be aware of the zombies around it. This will be passed to the other methods which it calls, and the methods those methods call, and so on. So this take_turn method should call `find_move()` with the `zombie_list` as an argument, then move the human to the new position returned by `find_move()`.

### The main program

Now we get to the primary logic of the program. Create and later call a `main()` function (in the usual way) that:

- Screen: Sets the variable `dimensions` to (800,600), and then sets the turtle window to be that size (you can use the
  `turtle.setup()` function to do this). If that creates a window too big for your screen, you can make it smaller.
- Initial agents:
  - Creates the variables `num_humans` and `num_zombies`. Set them to 1 for now while you get the program working. Later,
    change them to 20 humans and 1 zombie.
  - Creates the variables `human_list` and `zombie_list`, which start off empty. Fill each list with the specified
    number of Humans and Zombies using list comprehensions. When you create each human and zombie, make sure each human
    spawns in a random location, and the zombie spawns in the middle of simulation.
    - Recall that the center of the screen is (0, 0) when dealing with the turtle module.
- Main loop:
  - Creates a while loop that keeps running while there are still humans in the `human_list`. Inside that loop it:
    - Loops through the list of humans and calls their `take_turn()` method, passing in the list of zombies as an argument
    - Loops through the list of zombies and calls their `take_turn()` method, passing in the list of humans as an argument
      - Remember to get the `new_zombie` from the `take_turn` method and add it to the `zombie_list` if it in fact a zombie and not `None`

#### Performance optimizations

For smooth animation, you can control the frame rate by using the `turtle.tracer()` function and manually updating the screen.

```python
# Create the screen towards the top of the main function
screen = turtle.Screen()
screen.tracer(0) # disable automatic screen updates

# Do all your logic for drawing elements here
...

# In your main loop, refresh the screen after you've updated all the elements
# Note that this would be called once per frame, so ensure that
# it's at the *bottom* of whatever loop you are using
screen.update()
```

#### Helper functions

To calculate the distance between two points, and to update the position of something based on an angle and a speed, you
can use basic geometry. Here are some helpful functions:

```python
import math


def calculate_distance(point_1, point_2):
    x1, y1 = point_1
    x2, y2 = point_2
    return math.sqrt((x2 - x1) ** 2 + (y2 - y1) ** 2)


def calculate_new_position(current_position, angle_in_degrees, speed):
    """Takes a current position, an angle in degrees,
    and a movement speed, and returns the new position."""
    current_x, current_y = current_position
    angle_in_radians = math.radians(angle_in_degrees)
    new_x = current_x + (speed * math.cos(angle_in_radians))
    new_y = current_y + (speed * math.sin(angle_in_radians))
    return (new_x, new_y)

```

Turtle itself can also calculate the distance between the current turtle and some coordinate pair:

```python
my_turtle.distance(x_position, y_position)
```

## Testing Tips

1. Start by testing with a single agent at a time — make sure you can bring up a screen with at least one agent on it
2. Then have one of each agent type on the screen
3. Verify that the agents move correctly
4. Make sure that they can't move outside the screen
5. Verify that the zombie behaves as expected (pursiong, attacking, and converting humans)
6. Verify that the human behaves as expected (first the not smart ones, then the smart ones)

Again: the coordinate system is centered at (0, 0), so if the screen is 800x600 pixels, then the range of the x-coordinates is -400 to 400 and the range of the y-coordinates is -300 to 300. **Do not hard code these values** — use the `dimensions` variable instead.

Good luck!

Next: 7.0. Advanced Topics<br>
Previous: [6.6. Lab 6](6.6.%20Lab%206.md)
