# 15.6. Homework 15

For Homework 15, you are going to analyze and visualize the data we collected in our memory
experiment. Here is what you need to do:

0. Create a `figures/` folder inside the `Experiment/` folder
1. Get the data

   - Download the data in `data/hw4/data.zip` (note that the folder is hw4, but here we're going to think of it as hw15).
   - Unzip it in the data directory of your `Experiment/` folder from last week. Make sure to delete the zip file when unzipped.

2. In the Experiment's `src/` directory, create a file called `analysis.py`. Make sure it has a `main()` function and an
   `if __name__ == "__main__"` statement and all that, like a good Python script. In the file, in addition to `main()`,
   define
   the following functions (note that you will need to give some of these functions input arguments, based on the instructions below):
3. `import_data()`: which will open the files and create a pandas DataFrame out of them. Note that this is a bit
   different than in the lab. There are multiple files, not just one, so you have to deal with that somehow.

4. `clean_data()`: You will need to do some preprocessing of the data, largely the columns. Depending on your version of
   Pandas, you may also need to specify that certain columns are floats, or strings, or what have you for later analysis.
   It would also be helpful for later steps to convert the `stimulus_cond` column to string values, mapping 0 to "new" and
   1 to "old".
5. `trim_outliers()`: takes the full DataFrame and removes any trials where the RT is more than 2 seconds long. Should `return` the DataFrame back to
   `main()`

6. `get_summarized_means()`: takes the trimmed DataFrame and an `average_over` parameter, where `average_over` must be
   either `participant_id`, `stimulus`, or `trial_number`. The function will then create a new DataFrame containing the
   average performance of each subgroup on whatever `average_over` column name it is passed, averaging over the other
   two variables. In other words:
   - if it is passed `participant_id`, then the resulting DataFrame columns should be:
     `[participant_id, exp_condition, stimulus_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt]`.
   - if it is passed `stimulus`, then the resulting DataFrame columns should be:
     `[stimulus, exp_condition, stimulus_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt]`.
   - if it is passed `trial_number`, then the resulting DataFrame columns should be:
     `[trial_number, exp_condition, stimulus_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt]`.
7. `create_participant_histograms()`: create a single figure with two subplots, one containing a histogram of the
   participants' mean accuracy, and one containing a histogram of the participants' mean RT. Use the function you
   created in 4) to get the correct data. But you will need to average it further, since that DataFrame will have
   multiple rows per subject (one for combination of `exp_condition` and `item_cond`). Save the figure in the `figures/`
   folder. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your main function.
8. `create_participant_bars()`: creates a single figure with two subplots, each one a bar plot. The first bar subplot
   should show the mean accuracy (with standard error bars on each bar) as a function of 2x2 experiment design (words
   vs. pictures X old items vs. new items). In other words, there should be four bars:
   - one for the average accuracy of "old" trials when the stimulus was a word (text)
   - one for the average accuracy of "old" trials when the stimulus was a picture (image)
   - one for the average accuracy of "new" trials when the stimulus was a word (text)
   - one for the average accuracy of "new" trials when the stimulus was a picture (image)
     the second subplot should be the exact same as the first, except averaging RT instead of accuracy. Use the function you made in #4 to get the
     correct data. Save the figure in the `figures/` folder. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your main
     function. However, as the conditions are set to 0 (new) or 1 (old), you will need to convert them to "new" or "old" for the plot.
9. `create_trial_results_line_plot()`: creates a single figure with two subplots, each one a line plot. The first line plot
   should have four lines, showing the average accuracy in the four conditions (same as in #6) but this time broken down
   by trial number. In other words, you should have four lines with 20 pts each (one for the average accuracy
   performance on each trial). The second subplot should be the same, but using RT instead of accuracy. Use the function
   in #4 to get the right data. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your
   `main()` function.

When you are done. Zip your experiment directory and rename it `lastname_first_name_hw15.zip`, and submit it on the
course website.

Next: [17.0. Machine Learning](../CH17/17.0.%20Machine%20Learning.md)<br>
Previous: [15.5. Lab 15](15.5.%20Lab%2015.md)
