# 17.0. What is machine learning?

Machine learning is a technique related to artificial intelligence and statistics. It focuses on the development of
algorithms and models that enable computers to automatically learn from and make decisions about data without being
explicitly programmed. In other words, it is the process of training a computer to learn patterns and make predictions
based on input data. The goal of machine learning is to enable machines to improve their performance at a specific task
over time as they are exposed to more data. This makes machine learning a powerful tool for a variety of applications
such as natural language processing, image recognition, and recommendation systems.

Machine learning can be contrasted with what is sometimes called "Symbolic AI" or "Rule-based AI" where the behavior of
the system is decided ahead of time according to a set of rules. Consider the example of making an AI for playing chess.
In "Rule-based AI", we might have a system that is programmed using explicit rules for how to behave in a situation. For
example, imagine the following psuedo-code:

```python
def choose_move():
    for game_piece in game_piece_list:
        move_list = get_move_list(game_piece)  # a function that gets the list of all the legal moves for that piece
        best_move_score = 0
        best_move = None
        for move in move_list:
            move_value = calculate_move_value(move)  # a function that returns a score for how good each move is
            if move_value > best_move_score:
                best_move = (game_piece, move)
                best_move_score = move_value
    return best_move
```

In that code, we might have a lot of built-in information about how good each possible move is (e.g. +10 pts for
capturing a queen, +5 pts for capturing a rook, -10 pts for putting our queen in danger, etc.).

In contrast to this rule-based approach, the machine learning approach would be to let the machine figure out the best
move by playing lots of games, observing the actions and consequences, and making decisions based on that. For example,
a machine learning algorithm might make a move in a particular situation (i.e., with the game board in a particular
state). The algorithm might keep track of what happens on the next turn, or maybe even for the next 50 turns, and
"reward" or "punish" its memory of making that move in that situation based on whether there are good or bad
consequences. The machine learning algorithm could, at the beginning, make random moves. But it would very quickly learn
which kinds of moves lead to good outcomes and which kinds lead to bad outcomes.

Machine learning is typically divided into three different subdivisions: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and
reinforcement learning.

## Supervised learning

Supervised learning is when a machine learning algorithm is given a dataset consisting of two or more variables, and
trying to learn to predict the value of some variable(s) given the value of other variables. One common example of
supervised learning is **regression**. We have already done a bit of regression, when we were trying to predict the
percentage of children who say a word, given how frequent that word was in child-directed speech. Regression with just a
couple of variables using simple methods is usually just called "doing statistics", whereas when we are trying to
predict values using many variables using more complex algorithms, that typically gets called "machine learning". The
boundary is blurry, debated, and not really important for our purposes.

In supervised learning you will often see a distinction made between **regression** and **classification**. In
regression, we are typically trying to predict a variable with quantitative values. We have already done a bit of this,
when we were trying to predict what proportion of children say a word with the frequency of that word in child-directed
speech. In contrast, in classification we are trying to predict binary, categorical, or qualitative values, like whether
an outcome will occur or not; which of many categories some observation might belong to; or whether a photograph is one
of a hot dog or not a hot dog[^1]. We will talk a bit about why the terms regression and classification aren't the best
terms in a later section, but it's good to know them since you will see them used that way a lot.

![Regression vs Classification](../images/regression_classification.avif)

The important takeaway with supervised learning is that it is called "supervised" because we know the right answer for
the data we have (this value of X went with that value of Y, and this other value of X went with this other value of Y)
and we are trying to use that data to develop a model (like a line or more complex curve) that models the relationship
between those variables and that we can use to predict new data. Because we know the right answer for the data we have,
you will sometimes see supervised learning as being used to learn relationships in "labeled" data, since we know the
right "label", or output, for every input value we have.

## Unsupervised learning

Unsupervised learning contrasts with supervised learning in that we don't have "labeled" data or right answers. We just
have a bunch of variables, and are attempting to identify relationships or similarities between the data points, or to
identify clusters or subgroups within the data. There are several types of unsupervised learning algorithms.

- **Clustering**: Clustering algorithms group similar data points together based on their distance or similarity to one
  another.
- **Dimensionality reduction**: algorithms aim to reduce the number of input variables by identifying the most important
  features of the data. This can be useful for data visualization, as well as for reducing the computational complexity
  of subsequent analyses.
- **Association rule learning**: Association rule learning algorithms identify patterns in data that occur frequently
  together. These algorithms are often used in **market basket analysis** to identify which products are frequently
  purchased together.

## Reinforcement learning

Reinforcement Learning is like the chess example we started with. This is when an algorithm is trying to learn how to do
something (like play a game), and it gets points for doing well and loses points for doing poorly. The computer learns
by trying different things and seeing how many points it gets, with the goal of getting as many points as possible over
time. Reinforcement learning is typically defined in terms of an agent and an environment, where the agent learns to
make decisions and take actions based on feedback it receives from the environment, with the goal of maximizing its
long-term reward. Reinforcement learning is commonly used in applications such as robotics, game-playing, and autonomous
vehicles.

## `scikit-learn`

There are many ways you can do machine learning in python. You can, of course, program algorithms from scratch, and
there are times when that is what you need or want to do. But most of the time, people use modules of pre-coded
algorithms for machine learning. There are many choices. You can imagine a continuum of control to these approaches,
ranging from those that give you considerable control (but come at the cost of coding a lot yourself) to those that give
you very little control but do almost everything for you in return. If you take a machine learning class in a CS
department, you will be way over on the first side of that continuum, implimenting algorithms yourself so that you
really understand them. In a more applied class, you might be over on the other end of the spectrum, where you are just
trying to get a basic sense of what some of the algorithms can do. That's what we're going to do this week, and for
that, the `scikit-learn` module is a good starting option. It doesn't give you a lot of control, so in practice a lot of
science and industry people don't use it so much. But it is quick and easy to learn, and can give you a sense of what's
possible.

[^1]: See "Silicon Valley" Season 4 Episode 4 for the reference.

Next: [17.1. Two Variable Linear Regression](17.1.%20Two%20Variable%20Linear%20Regression.md)<br>
Previous: [16.X. Lab 16]
