ebook/CH18/18.5. Lab 18.md, before:

# 18.5. Lab 18

```python
def q1():
    print("\n##### Question 1 #####\n")
    """
    According to the readings for this week, what is the field of natural language processing, and what are some
    of its primary goals or problems that it is used to solve? Answer in a print statement.
    """


def q2():
    print("\n##### Question 2 #####\n")
    """
    Describe a brain and cognitive science question or issue that involves language that you find interesting, and
    describe how you might use natural language processing techniques to solve it.
    """


def q3():
    print("\n##### Question 3 #####\n")
    """
    Explain the code below in a print statement:

    import re
    fh = open("simpsons_phone_book.txt")
    for line in fh:
        if re.search(r"J.*Neu", line):
            print(line.rstrip())
    fh.close()
    """


def q4():
    print("\n##### Question 4 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of lowercase letters that ends with the letter "e".
    """


def q5():
    print("\n##### Question 5 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of characters that starts with an uppercase letter and is
    followed by one or more digits or spaces, and ends with a period.
    """


def q6():
    print("\n##### Question 6 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of digits that starts with the digit "1" and is followed by either
    "0", "1", or "2".
    """


def q7():
    print("\n##### Question 7 #####\n")
    """
    Load the document "data/ch11/cogsci.txt". Use spacy to make a list of all the sentence subjects in the
    document.

    """


def q8():
    print("\n##### Question 8 #####\n")
    """
    Load the document "data/ch11/cogsci.txt". Use spacy to make a list of all the unique entities in the
    document.
    """


def q9():
    print("\n##### Question 9 #####\n")
    """
    Create a list of 15 sentences:
        - five that you think are "positive valence"
        - five that you think are "negative"
        - five that you think might be tricky to classify
    It goes without saying, please do not use any inappropriate sentences or language that would violate the
    student code of conduct...
    Use the textblob module to get the valance scores of those sentences. Print the sentences the results.
    """


def q10():
    print("\n##### Question 10 #####\n")
    """
    Make a list of 16 words. Use spacy to get the word embedding vectors for these words. Then use numpy to
    calculate the similarities of each of these words with each other word, and save the values in a numpy
    matrix. Then use this matrix to create a dendrogram hierarchical cluster plot in matplotlib.
    """


def main():
    q1()
    q2()
    q3()
    q4()
    q5()
    q6()
    q7()
    q8()
    q9()
    q10()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

Next: [18.6 Homework 18](18.6.%20Homework%2018.md)<br>
Previous: [18.4 Language Models](18.4.%20Language%20Models.md)

Commit message:

Update 19.5 with tips for past chapters to look at

ebook/CH18/18.5. Lab 18.md, after:

# 18.5. Lab 18

Tip: In addition to this chapter, some helpful past sections include 2.4, 2.5, 2.9, and 17.5.

```python
def q1():
    print("\n##### Question 1 #####\n")
    """
    According to the readings for this week, what is the field of natural language processing, and what are some
    of its primary goals or problems that it is used to solve? Answer in a print statement.
    """


def q2():
    print("\n##### Question 2 #####\n")
    """
    Describe a brain and cognitive science question or issue that involves language that you find interesting, and
    describe how you might use natural language processing techniques to solve it.
    """


def q3():
    print("\n##### Question 3 #####\n")
    """
    Explain the code below in a print statement:

    import re
    fh = open("simpsons_phone_book.txt")
    for line in fh:
        if re.search(r"J.*Neu", line):
            print(line.rstrip())
    fh.close()
    """


def q4():
    print("\n##### Question 4 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of lowercase letters that ends with the letter "e".
    """


def q5():
    print("\n##### Question 5 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of characters that starts with an uppercase letter and is
    followed by one or more digits or spaces, and ends with a period.
    """


def q6():
    print("\n##### Question 6 #####\n")
    """
    Write a regular expression to match any sequence of digits that starts with the digit "1" and is followed by either
    "0", "1", or "2".
    """


def q7():
    print("\n##### Question 7 #####\n")
    """
    Load the document "data/ch11/cogsci.txt". Use spacy to make a list of all the sentence subjects in the
    document.

    """


def q8():
    print("\n##### Question 8 #####\n")
    """
    Load the document "data/ch11/cogsci.txt". Use spacy to make a list of all the unique entities in the
    document.
    """


def q9():
    print("\n##### Question 9 #####\n")
    """
    Create a list of 15 sentences:
        - five that you think are "positive valence"
        - five that you think are "negative"
        - five that you think might be tricky to classify
    It goes without saying, please do not use any inappropriate sentences or language that would violate the
    student code of conduct...
    Use the textblob module to get the valance scores of those sentences. Print the sentences the results.
    """


def q10():
    print("\n##### Question 10 #####\n")
    """
    Make a list of 16 words. Use spacy to get the word embedding vectors for these words. Then use numpy to
    calculate the similarities of each of these words with each other word, and save the values in a numpy
    matrix. Then use this matrix to create a dendrogram hierarchical cluster plot in matplotlib.
    """


def main():
    q1()
    q2()
    q3()
    q4()
    q5()
    q6()
    q7()
    q8()
    q9()
    q10()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

Next: [18.6 Homework 18](18.6.%20Homework%2018.md)<br>
Previous: [18.4 Language Models](18.4.%20Language%20Models.md)
