ebook/CH00/0.0. Installing Python.md, before:

# 0.0 Installing Python

Broadly speaking, there are two ways to install Python:

1. System-level installation
2. Package manager installation

Both methods have their pros and cons. System-level installation is generally faster and easier to start with, but it
may require more technical knowledge to manage down the line. Package manager installation is more complex initially,
but facilitates easier management of multiple projects.

For these reasons, system-level installation is recommended for most users. However, if you are a more advanced user
(e.g., you know how to use the terminal and expect to work on multiple projects that may require different versions of
Python), you may want to consider using a package manager. Whichever you choose, you will be able to follow the
instructions below to get started. Pick the relevant instructions based on your operating system, then continue to the
next section, [0.1. Creating & Running Python Programs](0.1.%20Creating%20&%20Running%20Python%20Programs.md).

## Option 1: System-level installation

Installing Python is easy, but the instructions are different depending on your operating system. Below are instructions
specific to your operating system. But no matter your operating system, the first steps are the same:

1. Go to the Python website http://python.org.
2. Hover your mouse over (do not click on!) the _Downloads_ button, as shown in the picture below, and then click on
   your operating system.
3. After clicking on your operating system at python.org, follow the operating system-specific instructions below.
   ![Image of Python.org's OS dropdown menu](../images/python_org.png)

### Mac

Mac OS already comes with Python installed, but it is not the newest version, and it will not work for this class, so
we need to install a different version.

4. Once you have clicked on the "macOS" link in the window above, you will see a list of Python versions under "Stable
   Versions." Click on the link "Download macOS 64-bit universal2 installer" under the Python 3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023
   line. This will download Python into your downloads folder.
5. Go to your downloads folder and find the file named "python-3.12.0-macos11.pkg". Double-click and open the file
   to start the installer.
6. Click the "Continue" and "Agree" buttons to complete the installation. Do not customize the installation in any way
   unless you really know what you are doing, as this will make some later instructions not work.

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

### Windows (version 7 and above)

Installing Python on Windows is very easy, but there is one critical step that is important to get right. If you
are using an older version of Windows (like Windows XP), check with your instructor before proceeding.

4. Once you have clicked on the "Windows" link in the image above, you will see a section labeled "Stable Releases." and
   below that, a bunch of links to different Python versions. Find (but do not click on) the version labeled "Python
   3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023". This is the version we will use in this class.
5. Under the link labeled Python 3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023", you will find links to a bunch of different ways to install.
   Find the link labeled "Download Windows Installer (64-bit)". This is the version we will use in this class. In some
   cases (older computers or computers with very small amounts of memory), you may need to use the "Download Windows
   Installer (32-bit)" instead. If you are worried about this, ask your instructor. Whichever you choose, click the link
   to download the installer into your downloads directory.
6. Find the installer program called "python-3.12.0-amd64.exe" (or "python-3.12.0.exe" if you downloaded the 32-bit
   version) in your downloads directory, and open it to run the installer. 7. You will see a sequence of windows asking
   you to click "Next" or "I Agree." Do so, but it is **VERY IMPORTANT** that when you see the window that says "Add
   python.exe to PATH" (as shown in the image below), you click the "Add Python to My Path." If you forget to do this,
   you will need to uninstall Python and start over.
   ![Screenshot of windows python installer](../images/windows_install.png)

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

### Linux/Unix

If you are using Linux in this class, then I am going to assume you already know what you are doing a bit and will just
be able to follow the instructions here:
[https://docs.python-guide.org/starting/install3/linux/](https://docs.python-guide.org/starting/install3/linux/)

But make one change. These instructions are for installing Python 3.8, and we will be using Python 3.12.0. So
everywhere in those instructions that you see Python 3.8, type Python 3.12.0 instead. If you have questions or
problems, contact your instructor.

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

## Option 2: Package manager installation

Package managers are a way to handle dependencies and ensure compatibility between different projects and reproducibility across time.

For this course, we recommend using the `conda` package manager. There are two major providers of `conda`, and we
recommend using the **Anaconda** distribution, which comes bundled with many popular scientific packages (like NumPy,
SciPy, and Pandas) that we'll use throughout the semester. The alternative is the **Miniconda** distribution, which is a
minimal installation of `conda` and does not come with any scientific packages. It is faster and takes up less space,
but you will have to install the scientific packages separately.

This section will walk you through the steps to install Anaconda, but will require that you have some familiarity with
the terminal. If you are unfamiliar with the terminal, you may want to consider the system-level installation option
above, and come back to this section later if you so choose.

### Installing Anaconda

1. Go to [Anaconda's downloads page](https://www.anaconda.com/download/success)
2. Select the version for your operating system
3. Download and run the installer
4. Follow the instructions to complete the installation
   - If on Windows, make sure to check the box that says "Add Anaconda to my PATH environment variable"
5. Make sure to restart your terminal session after the installation is complete, otherwise your operating system will
   not know about the new environment variables created by Anaconda (i.e., the `conda` command will not work).

### Creating a new Python environment

Once you have Anaconda installed, you can open your terminal and you should see `(base)` written to the left of your
prompt. This is the default environment that comes with Anaconda. You _could_ do all of your work in this base
environment, but it would be a good idea to make a new environment for this class so that you don't accidentally install
things into the wrong environment.

You can create a new Python environment using the following command in your **terminal** (not in a Python script):

```bash
conda create -n bcog200 python=3.12.0 anaconda
```

Follow the prompts to complete the installation. This will create a new environment called `bcog200` with Python 3.12
and all the scientific packages we'll need for the class (and many more). If you don't want to install all of those
packages, you can remove `anaconda` from the end of the command to create a barebones environment and then use
`conda install package_name_to_install` to install specific packages later.

Now that you've made the environment, you'll need to make sure that it is activated. You can do this by running the
following command in your terminal:

```bash
conda activate bcog200
```

You can check that the environment is activated if you see `(bcog200)` written to the left of your prompt instead of the
earlier `(base)` prompt. And if you forget the name of the environment you wish to activate, you can always see what
environments you have available by running `conda env list`.

Next: [0.1. Creating & Running Python Programs](0.1.%20Creating%20&%20Running%20Python%20Programs.md)

Commit message:

Update 0.0 with more explicit instructions to pick one option.

ebook/CH00/0.0. Installing Python.md, after:

# 0.0 Installing Python

Broadly speaking, there are two ways to install Python:

1. System-level installation
2. Package manager installation

Both methods have their pros and cons. System-level installation is generally faster and easier to start with, but it
may require more technical knowledge to manage down the line. Package manager installation is more complex initially,
but facilitates easier management of multiple projects.

For these reasons, system-level installation is recommended for most users. However, if you are a more advanced user
(e.g., you know how to use the terminal and expect to work on multiple projects that may require different versions of
Python), you may want to consider using a package manager. Whichever you choose, you will be able to follow the
instructions below to get started. Pick the relevant instructions based on your operating system, then continue to the
next section, [0.1. Creating & Running Python Programs](0.1.%20Creating%20&%20Running%20Python%20Programs.md). Pick only ONE of the options below — you should not install Python both ways, as that can cause issues.

## Option 1: System-level installation

Installing Python is easy, but the instructions are different depending on your operating system. Below are instructions
specific to your operating system. But no matter your operating system, the first steps are the same:

1. Go to the Python website http://python.org.
2. Hover your mouse over (do not click on!) the _Downloads_ button, as shown in the picture below, and then click on
   your operating system.
3. After clicking on your operating system at python.org, follow the operating system-specific instructions below.
   ![Image of Python.org's OS dropdown menu](../images/python_org.png)

### Mac

Mac OS already comes with Python installed, but it is not the newest version, and it will not work for this class, so
we need to install a different version.

4. Once you have clicked on the "macOS" link in the window above, you will see a list of Python versions under "Stable
   Versions." Click on the link "Download macOS 64-bit universal2 installer" under the Python 3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023
   line. This will download Python into your downloads folder.
5. Go to your downloads folder and find the file named "python-3.12.0-macos11.pkg". Double-click and open the file
   to start the installer.
6. Click the "Continue" and "Agree" buttons to complete the installation. Do not customize the installation in any way
   unless you really know what you are doing, as this will make some later instructions not work.

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

### Windows (version 7 and above)

Installing Python on Windows is very easy, but there is one critical step that is important to get right. If you
are using an older version of Windows (like Windows XP), check with your instructor before proceeding.

4. Once you have clicked on the "Windows" link in the image above, you will see a section labeled "Stable Releases." and
   below that, a bunch of links to different Python versions. Find (but do not click on) the version labeled "Python
   3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023". This is the version we will use in this class.
5. Under the link labeled Python 3.12.0 - Oct. 2, 2023", you will find links to a bunch of different ways to install.
   Find the link labeled "Download Windows Installer (64-bit)". This is the version we will use in this class. In some
   cases (older computers or computers with very small amounts of memory), you may need to use the "Download Windows
   Installer (32-bit)" instead. If you are worried about this, ask your instructor. Whichever you choose, click the link
   to download the installer into your downloads directory.
6. Find the installer program called "python-3.12.0-amd64.exe" (or "python-3.12.0.exe" if you downloaded the 32-bit
   version) in your downloads directory, and open it to run the installer. 7. You will see a sequence of windows asking
   you to click "Next" or "I Agree." Do so, but it is **VERY IMPORTANT** that when you see the window that says "Add
   python.exe to PATH" (as shown in the image below), you click the "Add Python to My Path." If you forget to do this,
   you will need to uninstall Python and start over.
   ![Screenshot of windows python installer](../images/windows_install.png)

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

### Linux/Unix

If you are using Linux in this class, then I am going to assume you already know what you are doing a bit and will just
be able to follow the instructions here:
[https://docs.python-guide.org/starting/install3/linux/](https://docs.python-guide.org/starting/install3/linux/)

But make one change. These instructions are for installing Python 3.8, and we will be using Python 3.12.0. So
everywhere in those instructions that you see Python 3.8, type Python 3.12.0 instead. If you have questions or
problems, contact your instructor.

Once you are done (or think you are), continue to the next section, where you will be able to test to see if you have
installed everything correctly.

## Option 2: Package manager installation

Package managers are a way to handle dependencies and ensure compatibility between different projects and reproducibility across time.

For this course, we recommend using the `conda` package manager. There are two major providers of `conda`, and we
recommend using the **Anaconda** distribution, which comes bundled with many popular scientific packages (like NumPy,
SciPy, and Pandas) that we'll use throughout the semester. The alternative is the **Miniconda** distribution, which is a
minimal installation of `conda` and does not come with any scientific packages. It is faster and takes up less space,
but you will have to install the scientific packages separately.

This section will walk you through the steps to install Anaconda, but will require that you have some familiarity with
the terminal. If you are unfamiliar with the terminal, you may want to consider the system-level installation option
above, and come back to this section later if you so choose.

### Installing Anaconda

1. Go to [Anaconda's downloads page](https://www.anaconda.com/download/success)
2. Select the version for your operating system
3. Download and run the installer
4. Follow the instructions to complete the installation
   - If on Windows, make sure to check the box that says "Add Anaconda to my PATH environment variable"
5. Make sure to restart your terminal session after the installation is complete, otherwise your operating system will
   not know about the new environment variables created by Anaconda (i.e., the `conda` command will not work).

### Creating a new Python environment

Once you have Anaconda installed, you can open your terminal and you should see `(base)` written to the left of your
prompt. This is the default environment that comes with Anaconda. You _could_ do all of your work in this base
environment, but it would be a good idea to make a new environment for this class so that you don't accidentally install
things into the wrong environment.

You can create a new Python environment using the following command in your **terminal** (not in a Python script):

```bash
conda create -n bcog200 python=3.12.0 anaconda
```

Follow the prompts to complete the installation. This will create a new environment called `bcog200` with Python 3.12
and all the scientific packages we'll need for the class (and many more). If you don't want to install all of those
packages, you can remove `anaconda` from the end of the command to create a barebones environment and then use
`conda install package_name_to_install` to install specific packages later.

Now that you've made the environment, you'll need to make sure that it is activated. You can do this by running the
following command in your terminal:

```bash
conda activate bcog200
```

You can check that the environment is activated if you see `(bcog200)` written to the left of your prompt instead of the
earlier `(base)` prompt. And if you forget the name of the environment you wish to activate, you can always see what
environments you have available by running `conda env list`.

Next: [0.1. Creating & Running Python Programs](0.1.%20Creating%20&%20Running%20Python%20Programs.md)
