ebook/CH00/0.4. Installing Python.md, before:

# 0.4. Installing Python with `uv`

There are several ways to install and manage Python on your computer:

1. **System-level installation**: Installing Python directly on your operating system
2. **Package manager installation**: Using tools like Conda (Anaconda/Miniconda)
3. **Modern Python tooling**: Using newer tools like `uv`

For this course, we'll be using [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a modern, high-performance
Python package installer and environment manager. Here are a few reasons why:

- **Speed**: `uv` is significantly *faster* than traditional tools like `pip` and `conda`
- **Reliability**: It creates *reproducible* environments with precise dependency resolution
- **Simplicity**: It's *easier to understand* and use than more complex alternatives
- **Modern approach**: It represents the direction Python tooling is *headed*

One major advantage of `uv` is that **you don't need to install Python first** - `uv` can manage
Python installations for you!

## Step 1: Install uv

Let's start by installing the `uv` tool using your terminal.

### Windows

In PowerShell, run:

```powershell
powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

### Mac/Linux

In Terminal, run:

```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

If you don't have `curl` (in other words, if you get an error by running the above command), you can
use `wget`:

```bash
wget -qO- https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### Both platforms

After successfully installing `uv`, close and reopen your terminal to ensure `uv` is in your PATH.

## Step 2: Verify uv Installation

To verify that `uv` was installed correctly, run:

```bash
uv --version
```

You should see the current version of `uv` displayed. For example, on my machine, I see:

```
uv 0.7.3 (3c413f74b 2025-05-07)
```

## Step 3: Initialize Your Project

Now we'll use `uv` to initialize a proper Python project for our course work. This will help us manage dependencies and make your code more reproducible.

```bash
# Navigate to your course folder
cd ~/Desktop/bcog200

# Initialize a Python project with uv
uv init
```

**XXX EDITED TO HERE XXX**

The `uv init` command creates several important files:

- **pyproject.toml**: A standardized configuration file that describes your project and its dependencies
- **requirements.txt**: A file listing the exact packages your project needs

This approach follows modern Python best practices for dependency management.

## Step 4: Create a Virtual Environment

Next, we'll create a virtual environment for our project:

```bash
# Create a virtual environment with Python 3.13
uv venv .venv --python=3.13
```

This command does two important things:

1. If you don't already have Python 3.13 installed, `uv` will download and install it
2. It creates a virtual environment in the `.venv` folder that uses that Python version

## Step 5: Activate the Environment

After creating the environment, you need to activate it:

```bash
# On Windows:
.venv\Scripts\activate

# On Mac/Linux:
source .venv/bin/activate
```

When the environment is activated, you'll see `(.venv)` at the beginning of your command prompt.

## Step 6: Install and Track Packages

Now we'll install packages and track them in our project configuration:

```bash
# Install packages and track them in pyproject.toml
uv pip install --upgrade numpy pandas matplotlib jupyter
```

This command:

1. Installs the latest versions of these packages
2. Updates your project's dependency list to include them

To see what packages are installed, you can run:

```bash
uv pip list
```

## Understanding Project Files

Let's examine the files created by `uv init`:

### pyproject.toml

This is the modern standard for Python project configuration. If you open it, you'll see something like:

```toml
[project]
name = "bcog200"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "BCOG 200 Course Project"
requires-python = ">=3.12"
dependencies = [
    "numpy",
    "pandas",
    "matplotlib",
    "jupyter",
]
```

This file makes it easy to:

- Share your code with others
- Ensure everyone uses the same versions of packages
- Install all dependencies with a single command

### requirements.txt

This file contains the exact versions of all installed packages, which helps ensure reproducibility. You can update it with:

```bash
uv pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

## Using `uv` Going Forward

Here are some common `uv` commands you'll use throughout this course:

- **Install a package and track it**: `uv pip install package_name`
- **Install packages from requirements**: `uv pip install -r requirements.txt`
- **Update a package**: `uv pip install --upgrade package_name`
- **Remove a package**: `uv pip uninstall package_name`
- **Run a Python script**: `python script.py` (with the environment activated)
- **Update lockfile**: `uv pip freeze > requirements.txt`

## Shell Autocompletion (Optional)

To make it easier to use `uv` with tab completion, you can set up shell autocompletion:

### Bash

```bash
echo 'eval "$(uv generate-shell-completion bash)"' >> ~/.bashrc
```

### PowerShell

```powershell
if (!(Test-Path -Path $PROFILE)) {
  New-Item -ItemType File -Path $PROFILE -Force
}
Add-Content -Path $PROFILE -Value '(& uv generate-shell-completion powershell) | Out-String | Invoke-Expression'
```

### Zsh

```bash
echo 'eval "$(uv generate-shell-completion zsh)"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

## Alternative Approaches (Not Required for This Course)

### System-level Installation

Directly installing Python on your operating system is simple but has limitations:

- Difficult to manage multiple Python versions
- Can lead to conflicts between packages
- Not as easily reproducible across different computers

### Conda (Anaconda/Miniconda)

Conda is a popular package manager that:

- Creates isolated environments
- Manages non-Python dependencies well (especially useful for data science)
- Has a large ecosystem of pre-compiled packages

However, Conda has some drawbacks:

- Significantly slower than `uv`
- More complex to understand and use
- Takes up more disk space (especially Anaconda)
- Can sometimes have dependency resolution issues

If you're already familiar with Conda and prefer to use it, you can do so, but the examples in this course will use `uv`.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues and Solutions

If you encounter issues with the installation, here are some common problems and their solutions:

1. **"Command not found" errors**: Make sure you've reopened your terminal after installation.

2. **Permission errors**:

   - On Mac/Linux, you might need to use `sudo` for some commands
   - On Windows, try running your terminal as administrator

3. **PATH issues**:

   - Make sure `uv` is in your PATH (see the section in 0.3 about the PATH)
   - On Windows, you might need to add it manually through System Properties > Environment Variables

4. **Activation doesn't work**:
   - If `activate` doesn't work, make sure you're using the correct path to the activate script
   - Windows uses backslashes: `.venv\Scripts\activate`
   - Mac/Linux uses forward slashes: `source .venv/bin/activate`

### Getting Help

If you're stuck, here are some resources:

- `uv` documentation: [https://docs.astral.sh/uv/](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- Ask your instructor or TA during office hours

## Exercise: Set Up Your Python Environment

Before moving on, complete these tasks to ensure your Python environment is ready:

1. Install `uv`
2. Navigate to your `bcog200` folder and initialize a project with `uv init`
3. Create a virtual environment
4. Activate the environment
5. Install the packages: `numpy`, `pandas`, `matplotlib`, and `jupyter`
6. Make sure your dependencies are tracked in `pyproject.toml`
7. Run a simple Python program to verify everything is working:

```python
# Save this file as test.py in your bcog200 folder. Naturally, you do not need this comment in the file itself.
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

print("Python is working!")
print(f"NumPy version: {np.__version__}")
print(f"Pandas version: {pd.__version__}")

# Create a simple plot
plt.figure(figsize=(6, 4))
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4], [1, 4, 9, 16], 'ro-')
plt.title('A Simple Plot')
plt.savefig('test_plot.png')
plt.close()

print("If you can see this message and a file called 'test_plot.png' was created, everything is working correctly!")
```

Run the program with:

```bash
python test.py
```

If you can see the message in your terminal and see a plot image created in the folder, you're all set!

Next: [0.5. Code vs. Comments](0.5.%20Code%20vs.%20Comments.md)
Previous: [0.1 Introduction to Your Computer](0.1.%20Intro%20to%20your%20computer.md)

Commit message:

Update 0.4 with more information on uv pip

ebook/CH00/0.4. Installing Python.md, after:

# 0.4. Installing Python with `uv`

There are several ways to install and manage Python on your computer:

1. **System-level installation**: Installing Python directly on your operating system
2. **Package manager installation**: Using tools like Conda (Anaconda/Miniconda)
3. **Modern Python tooling**: Using newer tools like `uv`

For this course, we'll be using [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a modern, high-performance
Python package installer and environment manager. Here are a few reasons why:

- **Speed**: `uv` is significantly *faster* than traditional tools like `pip` and `conda`
- **Reliability**: It creates *reproducible* environments with precise dependency resolution
- **Simplicity**: It's *easier to understand* and use than more complex alternatives
- **Modern approach**: It represents the direction Python tooling is *headed*

One major advantage of `uv` is that **you don't need to install Python first** - `uv` can manage
Python installations for you!

## Step 1: Install uv

Let's start by installing the `uv` tool using your terminal.

### Windows

In PowerShell, run:

```powershell
powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

### Mac/Linux

In Terminal, run:

```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

If you don't have `curl` (in other words, if you get an error by running the above command), you can
use `wget`:

```bash
wget -qO- https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

### Both platforms

After successfully installing `uv`, close and reopen your terminal to ensure `uv` is in your PATH.

## Step 2: Verify uv Installation

To verify that `uv` was installed correctly, run:

```bash
uv --version
```

You should see the current version of `uv` displayed. For example, on my machine, I see:

```
uv 0.7.3 (3c413f74b 2025-05-07)
```

## Step 3: Initialize Your Project

Now we'll use `uv` to initialize a proper Python project for our course work. This will help us manage dependencies and make your code more reproducible.

```bash
# Navigate to your course folder
cd ~/Desktop/bcog200

# Initialize a Python project with uv
uv init
```

**XXX EDITED TO HERE XXX**

The `uv init` command creates several important files:

- **pyproject.toml**: A standardized configuration file that describes your project and its dependencies
- **requirements.txt**: A file listing the exact packages your project needs

This approach follows modern Python best practices for dependency management.

## Step 4: Create a Virtual Environment

Next, we'll create a virtual environment for our project:

```bash
# Create a virtual environment with Python 3.13
uv venv .venv --python=3.13
```

This command does two important things:

1. If you don't already have Python 3.13 installed, `uv` will download and install it
2. It creates a virtual environment in the `.venv` folder that uses that Python version

## Step 5: Activate the Environment

After creating the environment, you need to activate it:

```bash
# On Windows:
.venv\Scripts\activate

# On Mac/Linux:
source .venv/bin/activate
```

When the environment is activated, you'll see `(.venv)` at the beginning of your command prompt.

## Step 6: Install and Track Packages

Now we'll install packages and track them in our project configuration:

```bash
# Install packages and track them in pyproject.toml
uv pip install --upgrade numpy pandas matplotlib jupyter
```

This command:

1. Installs the latest versions of these packages
2. Updates your project's dependency list to include them

To see what packages are installed, you can run:

```bash
uv pip list
```

> [!NOTE] 
> #### About the `uv pip` command
> 
> The `uv pip` command is a wrapper around the `pip` command that is included in the Python
> installation. It is used to install packages and track them in our project configuration. It's
> saying, "Hey uv, use pip to install these packages and track them in our project configuration."
> Many such commands are available in the `uv` tool, always prefaced with `uv`.

## Understanding Project Files

Let's examine the files created by `uv init`:

### pyproject.toml

This is the modern standard for Python project configuration. If you open it, you'll see something like:

```toml
[project]
name = "bcog200"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "BCOG 200 Course Project"
requires-python = ">=3.12"
dependencies = [
    "numpy",
    "pandas",
    "matplotlib",
    "jupyter",
]
```

This file makes it easy to:

- Share your code with others
- Ensure everyone uses the same versions of packages
- Install all dependencies with a single command

### requirements.txt

This file contains the exact versions of all installed packages, which helps ensure reproducibility. You can update it with:

```bash
uv pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

## Using `uv` Going Forward

Here are some common `uv` commands you'll use throughout this course:

- **Install a package and track it**: `uv pip install package_name`
- **Install packages from requirements**: `uv pip install -r requirements.txt`
- **Update a package**: `uv pip install --upgrade package_name`
- **Remove a package**: `uv pip uninstall package_name`
- **Run a Python script**: `python script.py` (with the environment activated)
- **Update lockfile**: `uv pip freeze > requirements.txt`

## Shell Autocompletion (Optional)

To make it easier to use `uv` with tab completion, you can set up shell autocompletion:

### Bash

```bash
echo 'eval "$(uv generate-shell-completion bash)"' >> ~/.bashrc
```

### PowerShell

```powershell
if (!(Test-Path -Path $PROFILE)) {
  New-Item -ItemType File -Path $PROFILE -Force
}
Add-Content -Path $PROFILE -Value '(& uv generate-shell-completion powershell) | Out-String | Invoke-Expression'
```

### Zsh

```bash
echo 'eval "$(uv generate-shell-completion zsh)"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

## Alternative Approaches (Not Required for This Course)

### System-level Installation

Directly installing Python on your operating system is simple but has limitations:

- Difficult to manage multiple Python versions
- Can lead to conflicts between packages
- Not as easily reproducible across different computers

### Conda (Anaconda/Miniconda)

Conda is a popular package manager that:

- Creates isolated environments
- Manages non-Python dependencies well (especially useful for data science)
- Has a large ecosystem of pre-compiled packages

However, Conda has some drawbacks:

- Significantly slower than `uv`
- More complex to understand and use
- Takes up more disk space (especially Anaconda)
- Can sometimes have dependency resolution issues

If you're already familiar with Conda and prefer to use it, you can do so, but the examples in this course will use `uv`.

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues and Solutions

If you encounter issues with the installation, here are some common problems and their solutions:

1. **"Command not found" errors**: Make sure you've reopened your terminal after installation.

2. **Permission errors**:

   - On Mac/Linux, you might need to use `sudo` for some commands
   - On Windows, try running your terminal as administrator

3. **PATH issues**:

   - Make sure `uv` is in your PATH (see the section in 0.3 about the PATH)
   - On Windows, you might need to add it manually through System Properties > Environment Variables

4. **Activation doesn't work**:
   - If `activate` doesn't work, make sure you're using the correct path to the activate script
   - Windows uses backslashes: `.venv\Scripts\activate`
   - Mac/Linux uses forward slashes: `source .venv/bin/activate`

### Getting Help

If you're stuck, here are some resources:

- `uv` documentation: [https://docs.astral.sh/uv/](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- Ask your instructor or TA during office hours

## Exercise: Set Up Your Python Environment

Before moving on, complete these tasks to ensure your Python environment is ready:

1. Install `uv`
2. Navigate to your `bcog200` folder and initialize a project with `uv init`
3. Create a virtual environment
4. Activate the environment
5. Install the packages: `numpy`, `pandas`, `matplotlib`, and `jupyter`
6. Make sure your dependencies are tracked in `pyproject.toml`
7. Run a simple Python program to verify everything is working:

```python
# Save this file as test.py in your bcog200 folder. Naturally, you do not need this comment in the file itself.
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

print("Python is working!")
print(f"NumPy version: {np.__version__}")
print(f"Pandas version: {pd.__version__}")

# Create a simple plot
plt.figure(figsize=(6, 4))
plt.plot([1, 2, 3, 4], [1, 4, 9, 16], 'ro-')
plt.title('A Simple Plot')
plt.savefig('test_plot.png')
plt.close()

print("If you can see this message and a file called 'test_plot.png' was created, everything is working correctly!")
```

Run the program with:

```bash
python test.py
```

If you can see the message in your terminal and see a plot image created in the folder, you're all set!

Next: [0.5. Code vs. Comments](0.5.%20Code%20vs.%20Comments.md)
Previous: [0.1 Introduction to Your Computer](0.1.%20Intro%20to%20your%20computer.md)
