# 0.5. Code vs. Comments

Now that you have Python installed and have created your first Python program, we can start getting
into details.

A Python file can have code and comments. Code is the commands that are run by the Python app.
Comments are lines that Python ignores, so you can use it to add notes and documentation to your
programs. Below is an example of a simple Python program with code and comments.

```python
# this is a "Hello World" program.
# It is often the first program we write in a language
# so that we can make sure everything is working correctly.

print("Hello World!")  # this line has code and comments
```

There are several different ways you can create comments in a Python program. The first way, as
shown above, is using the `#` symbol. Python ignores everything on a line that comes after a `#`
symbol. If the symbol is at the beginning of the line, as on the first three lines, then the whole
line is ignored. You can also put the `#` on the same line as the code, and everything after the `#`
will be ignored. Good programming practice is to use the latter type sparingly, only for lines that
really need explaining.

One limitation to the `#` symbol is that it only comments out a single line, and so if you want to
write a multi-line sequence of comments, like a description of the whole program, then it is
annoying to have to put a `#` over and over. You can create a multi-line comment using sets of three
single or double quotes.

```Python
"""
Here is a multi-line comment.
I can write as many comments as I want without needing more comment symbols.

I can still use single quotes in the comments, and it stays a comment: 
'This is a quoted sentence'
Just be careful not to put three in a row unless you are ending the comment
block.
"""

x = 5
print(x)

'''
Single quotes work the same way. you can use single quotes ' or double quotes
" in the comment block, but again just be careful not to use three of the
same type in a row.
'''

```

We will talk more about the proper use of comments later. But using comments is very important
because it helps others understand your code, and helps you understand your own code if you haven't
looked at it in a while. Another trick to remember is that if there is some code that you have
written in a program, but you want to temporarily prevent it from running while you work on another
part, you can just comment it out (turn it into a comment). Most text editors will let you toggle
comments via a keyboard shortcut, the most common being `CTRL` + `/` on Windows and `CMD` + `/` on a
Mac.

> [!NOTE]
> #### Other opinions are available on the use of comments
> Some people think that comments are a waste of time because computers ignore them. Some say that
> the best comments are self-evident; that is, the code itself should be so well written that it
> should be easy to understand without the need for comments. It is also the case that comments may
> not be kept up-to-date as changes are made to programs, so that they end up actively impeding
> understanding. I agree with this to some extent, but I also think that comments are useful for
> explaining why something is written the way it is, and for explaining the big picture of what is
> going on in the code — even if the code itself should be written so that the meaning is
> self-evident.

Next: [0.6. The Interactive Shell](0.6.%20The%20Interactive%20Shell.md)<br>
Previous: [0.4. Installing Python](0.4.%20Installing%20Python.md)
