ebook/CH00/0.6. The Interactive Shell.md, before:

# 0.6. The Interactive Shell

So far, when we have run Python programs, you have typed `python` followed by a file name (e.g.,
`python filename.py`). You can, however, just type `python` in the terminal without a file name and
this will open what is referred to as the "interactive shell."

![Image of the interactive shell](../images/interactive_python2.png)

Note that the prompt has changed from something involving your computer name, user name, and path to
just three arrows `>>>`. If you see the three arrows, you know you are in the interactive shell. In
the interactive shell, you can type and execute Python commands one at a time.

The interactive shell can be a very useful and quick way to try out a line or a couple of lines of
code to see if it works or to remind yourself how to do something.

When you are ready to exit the interactive shell and return back to the regular Terminal prompt,
just type `exit()` or <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>D</kbd>.

Next: [0.7. Jupyter Notebooks](0.7.%20Jupyter%20Notebooks.md)<br>
Previous: [0.5. Code vs. Comments](0.5.%20Code%20vs.%20Comments.md)

Commit message:

Update 0.6 to remind the reader about activating the environment or use `uv run`

ebook/CH00/0.6. The Interactive Shell.md, after:

# 0.6. The Interactive Shell

So far, when we have run Python programs, you have typed `python` followed by a file name (e.g.,
`python filename.py`). You can, however, just type `python` in the terminal without a file name and
this will open what is referred to as the "interactive shell." (Assuming that you have activated
your environment, of course; otherwise use `uv run python` instead.)

![Image of the interactive shell](../images/interactive_python2.png)

Note that the prompt has changed from something involving your computer name, user name, and path to
just three arrows `>>>`. If you see the three arrows, you know you are in the interactive shell. In
the interactive shell, you can type and execute Python commands one at a time.

The interactive shell can be a very useful and quick way to try out a line or a couple of lines of
code to see if it works or to remind yourself how to do something.

When you are ready to exit the interactive shell and return back to the regular Terminal prompt,
just type `exit()` or <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>D</kbd>.

Next: [0.7. Jupyter Notebooks](0.7.%20Jupyter%20Notebooks.md)<br>
Previous: [0.5. Code vs. Comments](0.5.%20Code%20vs.%20Comments.md)
