ebook/CH00/0.8. Other Useful Tips.md, before:

# 0.8. Other Useful Tips

## Creating Aliases

Aliases are shortcuts that let you run longer commands with shorter names. They're particularly
useful for frequently used commands or complex operations.

### Mac (zsh)

Since macOS Catalina, the default shell is zsh. Here's how to create aliases in zsh:

1. Open your terminal
2. Type `code ~/.zshrc` to open your zsh configuration file (or `nano ~/.zshrc` if you prefer)
3. Add your aliases at the end of the file, one per line. For example:
   ```bash
   alias reload='source ~/.zshrc'
   alias ll='ls -la'
   ```
4. Save and exit. If using `nano`, you can do so by pressing <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>O</kbd>, then
   Enter, then <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>X</kbd>
5. Apply the changes by running `source ~/.zshrc`

Instructions for systems using bash instead of zsh are exactly the same, except you'll use
`~/.bashrc` instead of `~/.zshrc`.

### Windows (PowerShell)

In Windows PowerShell, you can create aliases in two ways:

1. **Temporary Aliases** (lasts only for current session):
   ```powershell
   Set-Alias -Name ll -Value "Get-ChildItem -Force"
   ```

2. **Permanent Aliases** (persists across sessions):
   1. Open PowerShell
   2. Type `notepad $PROFILE` to open your PowerShell profile
   3. If the file doesn't exist, create it by running:
      ```powershell
      New-Item -Path $PROFILE -Type File -Force
      ```
   4. Add your aliases to the file:
      ```powershell
      Set-Alias -Name ll -Value "Get-ChildItem -Force"
      Set-Alias -Name reload -Value "source $PROFILE"
      ```
   5. Save the file and restart PowerShell

Note: The `$PROFILE` location is typically
`C:\Users\YourUsername\Documents\WindowsPowerShell\Microsoft.PowerShell_profile.ps1` (Again, pay
attention to the placeholder present in the command above.)

## Keyboard Shortcuts

One key to getting faster at programming is getting good at using keyboard shortcuts instead of
needing to click around with the mouse a lot. Here are a bunch of examples that you should learn to
do:

- Saving a file (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>S</kbd>), copying
  (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>), and pasting
  (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>V</kbd>) text.

Many text editors also have programming-specific keyboard shortcuts.

- One huge time saver is knowing that you can quickly turn multiple lines of code into comments
  (perhaps code that you want to make so it doesn't run at the moment while you are testing
  something else). You can do this in most text editors by highlighting those multiple lines of code
  and then typing <kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> (i.e., slash, the one on the key with
  the question mark).
- You can duplicate a line by typing <kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬇︎</kbd>.
- You can move a line up or down by typing <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬆︎</kbd> or <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬇︎</kbd>.
- Highlight a word and then press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>/<kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>D</kbd> to highlight the next occurrence of the word. You can keep pressing it to highlight some or all occurrences and then edit all of them simultaneously.

Next: [1. Python Statements & Expressions](../CH01/1.0.%20Python%20Statements%20%26%20Expressions.md)<br>
Previous: [0.7. Jupyter Notebooks](0.7.%20Jupyter%20Notebooks.md)

Commit message:

Update 0.8 with information on how to connect the editor to the virtual environment

ebook/CH00/0.8. Other Useful Tips.md, after:

# 0.8. Other Useful Tips

## Creating Aliases

Aliases are shortcuts that let you run longer commands with shorter names. They're particularly
useful for frequently used commands or complex operations.

### Mac (zsh)

Since macOS Catalina, the default shell is zsh. Here's how to create aliases in zsh:

1. Open your terminal
2. Type `code ~/.zshrc` to open your zsh configuration file (or `nano ~/.zshrc` if you prefer)
3. Add your aliases at the end of the file, one per line. For example:
   ```bash
   alias reload='source ~/.zshrc'
   alias ll='ls -la'
   ```
4. Save and exit. If using `nano`, you can do so by pressing <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>O</kbd>, then
   Enter, then <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>X</kbd>
5. Apply the changes by running `source ~/.zshrc`

Instructions for systems using bash instead of zsh are exactly the same, except you'll use
`~/.bashrc` instead of `~/.zshrc`.

### Windows (PowerShell)

In Windows PowerShell, you can create aliases in two ways:

1. **Temporary Aliases** (lasts only for current session):
   ```powershell
   Set-Alias -Name ll -Value "Get-ChildItem -Force"
   ```

2. **Permanent Aliases** (persists across sessions):
   1. Open PowerShell
   2. Type `notepad $PROFILE` to open your PowerShell profile
   3. If the file doesn't exist, create it by running:
      ```powershell
      New-Item -Path $PROFILE -Type File -Force
      ```
   4. Add your aliases to the file:
      ```powershell
      Set-Alias -Name ll -Value "Get-ChildItem -Force"
      Set-Alias -Name reload -Value "source $PROFILE"
      ```
   5. Save the file and restart PowerShell

Note: The `$PROFILE` location is typically
`C:\Users\YourUsername\Documents\WindowsPowerShell\Microsoft.PowerShell_profile.ps1` (Again, pay
attention to the placeholder present in the command above.)

## Keyboard Shortcuts

One key to getting faster at programming is getting good at using keyboard shortcuts instead of
needing to click around with the mouse a lot. Here are a bunch of examples that you should learn to
do:

- Saving a file (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>S</kbd>), copying
  (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>C</kbd>), and pasting
  (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>V</kbd>) text.

Many text editors also have programming-specific keyboard shortcuts.

- One huge time saver is knowing that you can quickly turn multiple lines of code into comments
  (perhaps code that you want to make so it doesn't run at the moment while you are testing
  something else). You can do this in most text editors by highlighting those multiple lines of code
  and then typing <kbd>CTRL</kbd>/<kbd>CMD</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> (i.e., slash, the one on the key with
  the question mark).
- You can duplicate a line by typing <kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬇︎</kbd>.
- You can move a line up or down by typing <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬆︎</kbd> or <kbd>Alt</kbd>+<kbd>⬇︎</kbd>.
- Highlight a word and then press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>/<kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>D</kbd> to highlight the next occurrence of the word. You can keep pressing it to highlight some or all occurrences and then edit all of them simultaneously.

## Telling Your Editor to Use Your Virtual Environment

If you're using VS Code to edit your Python files, you can tell it to use your virtual environment
by opening the project folder in VS Code and then clicking the Python Interpreter dropdown in the
bottom right corner of the window. This will give you a dropdown menu of all the Python interpreters
on your system. You can select the one you want to use (e.g., `.venv/bin/python`) by clicking on it.
Alternatively, you can open the command palette (press
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd>/<kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>P</kbd>) and type "Python: Select Interpreter"
to open the interpreter selection dialog.

This is important because it allows your editor to know which packages are available to you and to
give you proper syntax highlighting and other helpful features (like pressing <kbd>Tab</kbd> to
perform autocompletion).

Next: [1. Python Statements & Expressions](../CH01/1.0.%20Python%20Statements%20%26%20Expressions.md)<br>
Previous: [0.7. Jupyter Notebooks](0.7.%20Jupyter%20Notebooks.md)
