# 8.0. Good Programming Techniques

Up to this point, you've already encountered a lot of advice on how to write good code. Here, we'll consolidate some of
the most important points, and introduce several new ones. But why bother with any of this in the first place?

## Why is good programming technique important?

Programming is different from most other intellectual activities in that the fruit of your labor reflects a simple
truth: your code either works, or it doesn't. Because of this bare truth, some believe that the _only_ important feature
of a program is that it achieve the desired result, regardless of how it does so or how it is written. And the pressure
to produce code that "just works" is often high: you might have tight deadlines to ship features, or do a good job on
your assignments, for example. But focusing solely on the functionality of code while neglecting its form is a recipe
for disaster in the long run.

The reason for this is that the _form_ of a program is _not_ merely a matter of style, but substance. When writing code,
there are many ways to achieve a given result. Alas, solutions to problems are not created equal: beyond merely getting
the code to "work", you may also value the efficiency, readability, maintainability, and adaptability of what you have
written — if not today, then perhaps tomorrow, when you or someone else needs to revisit and maintain (or even build
upon!) your code. At that point, the difference between good and bad programming practices could make the difference
between a project that delights you and functions reliably, and a project that is a constant source of frustration and
bugs.

To sum up, good programming techniques are not just a matter of (superficial) style, but an important set of guidelines
and best practices that can save you time and make your life easier by making what you write more readable and robust.
It also makes it easier for others to understand and modify your code, which opens the door for collaboration and
extensions of your work.

> [!TIP]
> It's okay to bend the rules!
> It's important to note that there are no strict rules of "good programming"; all
> we can ever have are guidelines, some of which are a matter of convention, and some of which are a matter of taste.
> Sometimes, a good programmer will break community guidelines if it makes the code better or more readable. For
> example, if you're contributing to an existing project that uses camelCase for variables, then it makes sense to
> continue using camelCase in your code contributions, even if it may not be preferred by most Pythonistas.

[Next: 8.1. Style and Readability](8.1.%20Style%20and%20Readability.md)<br>
[TODO: Previous: 7.X. Lab 7]
