ebook/CH08/8.1. Style and Readability.md, before:

# 8.1. Style and readability

## PEP8: A style guide for Python

The [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) style guide is a set of writing recommendations adopted by the Python
community (originally written by Python's creator, Guido van Rossum). It is not a strict set of rules, but can be
helpful to follow. Many large organizations (e.g., Google) explicitly require that all code within the organization
conform to PEP 8. If you want your code to automatically follow these guidelines, you can use
[Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), a popular code formatter for Python (I use it myself and highly
recommend it). Many IDEs (e.g., VSCode, PyCharm) also have extensions/plugins that automatically format your scripts
with Black whenever you wish, such as every time you save the file, so you can offload the grueling work of formatting
to your computer (it won't mind).

## Naming

We covered variable and function naming in previous chapters, so here's a quick review of some of the most important
points.

- **Stay consistent**: Consistent naming conventions make your code more readable and maintainable. In Python,
  `snake_case` is typically used for variables and functions, `PascalCase` for classes, and `UPPER_CASE` for constants.
- **Use descriptive names**: Use descriptive names that convey meaning. It's okay to use long names if they help clarify
  your intent. E.g., don't just use `x`, `y`, and `z` for all your variables; `distance`, `time`, and `speed` are
  better. `distance_in_miles`, `time_in_hours`, and `speed_in_mph` can be even better, depending on the context.
  Consider tradeoffs between concision and clarity. As they say in the [Zen of
  Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0020/), "Explicit is better than implicit."
- **Avoid abbreviations**: Opt for full words instead of abbreviations or acronyms unless they are well-known.
- **Consider scope**: If you're only using a variable within a narrow context, it's okay to use a short name. E.g., the
  name `i` for loop indices is clear enough. If it's a variable you literally do not need to use at all, then by
  convention you can name it `_` (most IDEs will even gray it out, such as in `for _ in range(10): do_something()`).
- **No hard-coding**: Which of these two is more readable? `4200 / 10` or `DISTANCE_IN_METERS / TIME_IN_SECONDS`? If you
  find yourself typing an immutable data value into your editor (e.g., a number, string, etc.), you should probably
  define a `CONSTANT` so that you save yourself a lot of time in the future. Odds are that you will use that value more
  than once throughout your program, so if you need to change it in the future it's better to change it in one place
  only.

## Commenting and docstrings

Comments and docstrings provide important context to your code, making it more understandable to others (and, perhaps
most importantly, to your future self!). Good comments explain the "why" behind your code, not just the "what".

### Comments

Comments in Python start with a `#` and continue to the end of the line. They're ignored by the Python interpreter.

```python
# This is a comment
x = 5  # This is also a comment
# The line below is commented out, so it will not be executed
# y = 10
```

Use comments to:

1. Explain complex algorithms or logic
2. Clarify the purpose of important variables or functions
3. Mark sections of code (e.g., `# Analysis` or `# Plotting`)
4. Temporarily disable code during debugging (as via <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> or <kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> in your editor)

However, do take care to avoid over-commenting. Good code should be largely self-explanatory, with comments only
providing necessary context. If you find yourself writing a lot of comments, consider if you can make your code clearer
instead.

### Docstrings

Docstrings are _string literals_ that appear as the first statement in a module, function, class, or method. They're
denoted by triple quotes (`"""`) and document the purpose and behavior of Python code.

```python
def calculate_area(radius):
    """
    Calculate the area of a circle.

    Args:
        radius (float): The radius of the circle.

    Returns:
        float: The area of the circle.
    """
    return 3.14159 * radius ** 2
```

Docstrings should:

1. Briefly explain the purpose of some reusable block of code (e.g., function, class, module)
2. Describe the parameters/arguments, including their types
3. Specify the return value and its type
4. Mention any exceptions that might be raised
5. Provide examples of usage, if helpful

You can access a docstring using the `__doc__` attribute or the `help()` function:

```python
print(calculate_area.__doc__)
help(calculate_area)
```

## Long lines and/or strings

In general, we want to avoid long lines of code. Most programming style guides tend to recommend
that lines should be no wider than 80-88 characters. That's not very wide! The most common
contributor to long lines is likely long strings. To make such strings easier to read, you can use
triple quotes (`"""`) to wrap the string, and use line breaks where appropriate.

```python
# Bad
bad_long_string = "This is a long string that is quite hard to read, requiring scrolling to the right in order to read it. \nThis is the second paragraph of the long string. \nWe need to use backslash-n in order to make new lines."

# Better
better_long_string = """
  This is a long string that would ordinarily be quite hard to read
  if it were not for the fact that we can use triple quotes to wrap it.

  This is the second paragraph of the long string.
  See how we can use line breaks to make the string easier to read?
"""
```

This approach, however, is a double-edged sword. Such a string, by default, will have the line
breaks and indentation included in the string (here I've included a level of indentation in the
above string to make this point salient). Often, you don't want that indentation to be reflected in
the output. There are several ways to avoid this, but perhaps the simplest is to use the `dedent`
method from the `textwrap` module included in the standard library — so you don't have to pip
install anything to use it.

```python
import textwrap

# dedent — meaning the opposite of indent — the string
best_long_string = textwrap.dedent(better_long_string)
```

## Type hints

Although Python is a dynamically typed language, optional _type hints_ can help you catch errors and make your code more
readable. Some popular packages (e.g., FastAPI) all but require type hints for your variables in function and class
definitions. Type hints are denoted by a colon (`:`) and a type annotation after the variable name, but before the
equals sign (`=`) in an assignment.

```python
# type hinting some variables
name: str = "Stefan"
favorite_number: int = 42
test_scores: list[float] = [88.1, 92.3, 78.4, 95.2, 89.7]


# type hinting a function
# note that the return type is annotated after the `->` arrow
def calculate_area(radius: float) -> float:
    """
    Calculate the area of a circle.

    Args:
        radius (float): The radius of the circle.

    Returns:
        float: The area of the circle.
    """
    return 3.14159 * radius ** 2
```

Type hints are not enforced at runtime, but they can be used by static type checkers (like `mypy`) and IDEs to catch
potential errors before your code runs. For example, if you have a function that is supposed to return a `float` but
you mistakenly use the returned value as if it were a `str`, the type checker will catch the error.

> [!TIP]
> Enabling type checking in VS Code
> You can enable type checking in VS Code by installing the `Pylance` extension. Then, in your `settings.json` file, add
> the following line:
>
> ```json
> "python.analysis.typeCheckingMode": "basic",
> ```
>
> Your editor will then highlight potential type errors in your code.

[Next: 8.2. Idiomatic Python](8.2.%20Idiomatic%20Python.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.0. Good Programming Techniques](8.0.%20Good%20Programming%20Techniques.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.1 with implicit string concatenation.

ebook/CH08/8.1. Style and Readability.md, after:

# 8.1. Style and readability

## PEP8: A style guide for Python

The [PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) style guide is a set of writing recommendations adopted by the Python
community (originally written by Python's creator, Guido van Rossum). It is not a strict set of rules, but can be
helpful to follow. Many large organizations (e.g., Google) explicitly require that all code within the organization
conform to PEP 8. If you want your code to automatically follow these guidelines, you can use
[Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), a popular code formatter for Python (I use it myself and highly
recommend it). Many IDEs (e.g., VSCode, PyCharm) also have extensions/plugins that automatically format your scripts
with Black whenever you wish, such as every time you save the file, so you can offload the grueling work of formatting
to your computer (it won't mind).

## Naming

We covered variable and function naming in previous chapters, so here's a quick review of some of the most important
points.

- **Stay consistent**: Consistent naming conventions make your code more readable and maintainable. In Python,
  `snake_case` is typically used for variables and functions, `PascalCase` for classes, and `UPPER_CASE` for constants.
- **Use descriptive names**: Use descriptive names that convey meaning. It's okay to use long names if they help clarify
  your intent. E.g., don't just use `x`, `y`, and `z` for all your variables; `distance`, `time`, and `speed` are
  better. `distance_in_miles`, `time_in_hours`, and `speed_in_mph` can be even better, depending on the context.
  Consider tradeoffs between concision and clarity. As they say in the [Zen of
  Python](https://peps.python.org/pep-0020/), "Explicit is better than implicit."
- **Avoid abbreviations**: Opt for full words instead of abbreviations or acronyms unless they are well-known.
- **Consider scope**: If you're only using a variable within a narrow context, it's okay to use a short name. E.g., the
  name `i` for loop indices is clear enough. If it's a variable you literally do not need to use at all, then by
  convention you can name it `_` (most IDEs will even gray it out, such as in `for _ in range(10): do_something()`).
- **No hard-coding**: Which of these two is more readable? `4200 / 10` or `DISTANCE_IN_METERS / TIME_IN_SECONDS`? If you
  find yourself typing an immutable data value into your editor (e.g., a number, string, etc.), you should probably
  define a `CONSTANT` so that you save yourself a lot of time in the future. Odds are that you will use that value more
  than once throughout your program, so if you need to change it in the future it's better to change it in one place
  only.

## Commenting and docstrings

Comments and docstrings provide important context to your code, making it more understandable to others (and, perhaps
most importantly, to your future self!). Good comments explain the "why" behind your code, not just the "what".

### Comments

Comments in Python start with a `#` and continue to the end of the line. They're ignored by the Python interpreter.

```python
# This is a comment
x = 5  # This is also a comment
# The line below is commented out, so it will not be executed
# y = 10
```

Use comments to:

1. Explain complex algorithms or logic
2. Clarify the purpose of important variables or functions
3. Mark sections of code (e.g., `# Analysis` or `# Plotting`)
4. Temporarily disable code during debugging (as via <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> or <kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>/</kbd> in your editor)

However, do take care to avoid over-commenting. Good code should be largely self-explanatory, with comments only
providing necessary context. If you find yourself writing a lot of comments, consider if you can make your code clearer
instead.

### Docstrings

Docstrings are _string literals_ that appear as the first statement in a module, function, class, or method. They're
denoted by triple quotes (`"""`) and document the purpose and behavior of Python code.

```python
def calculate_area(radius):
    """
    Calculate the area of a circle.

    Args:
        radius (float): The radius of the circle.

    Returns:
        float: The area of the circle.
    """
    return 3.14159 * radius ** 2
```

Docstrings should:

1. Briefly explain the purpose of some reusable block of code (e.g., function, class, module)
2. Describe the parameters/arguments, including their types
3. Specify the return value and its type
4. Mention any exceptions that might be raised
5. Provide examples of usage, if helpful

You can access a docstring using the `__doc__` attribute or the `help()` function:

```python
print(calculate_area.__doc__)
help(calculate_area)
```

## Long lines and/or strings

In general, we want to avoid long lines of code. Most programming style guides tend to recommend
that lines should be no wider than 80-88 characters. That's not very wide! The most common
contributor to long lines is likely long strings. To make such strings easier to read, you can use
triple quotes (`"""`) to wrap the string, and use line breaks where appropriate.

```python
# Bad
bad_long_string = "This is a long string that is quite hard to read, requiring scrolling to the right in order to read it. \nThis is the second paragraph of the long string. \nWe need to use backslash-n in order to make new lines."

# Better
better_long_string = """
  This is a long string that would ordinarily be quite hard to read
  if it were not for the fact that we can use triple quotes to wrap it.

  This is the second paragraph of the long string.
  See how we can use line breaks to make the string easier to read?
"""
```

This approach, however, is a double-edged sword. Such a string, by default, will have the line
breaks and indentation included in the string (here I've included a level of indentation in the
above string to make this point salient). Often, you don't want that indentation to be reflected in
the output. There are several ways to avoid this, but perhaps the simplest is to use the `dedent`
method from the `textwrap` module included in the standard library — so you don't have to pip
install anything to use it.

```python
import textwrap

# dedent — meaning the opposite of indent — the string
best_long_string = textwrap.dedent(better_long_string)
```

Another approach would be to use implicit string concatenation. When you put parentheses around a series of strings
that are not separated by any operators, Python will automatically concatenate them for you.

```python
another_reasonable_long_string = (
    "This is a long string that would ordinarily be quite hard to read, "
    "requiring scrolling to the right in order to read it. "
    "Note that there are no line breaks in the string, "
    "No plus signs, no backslashes, no nothing. "
    "It's just a very long string that happens to be spread across multiple lines. "
    "\n\nIf you want line breaks, make sure to use backslash-n"
)
```

## Type hints

Although Python is a dynamically typed language, optional _type hints_ can help you catch errors and make your code more
readable. Some popular packages (e.g., FastAPI) all but require type hints for your variables in function and class
definitions. Type hints are denoted by a colon (`:`) and a type annotation after the variable name, but before the
equals sign (`=`) in an assignment.

```python
# type hinting some variables
name: str = "Stefan"
favorite_number: int = 42
test_scores: list[float] = [88.1, 92.3, 78.4, 95.2, 89.7]


# type hinting a function
# note that the return type is annotated after the `->` arrow
def calculate_area(radius: float) -> float:
    """
    Calculate the area of a circle.

    Args:
        radius (float): The radius of the circle.

    Returns:
        float: The area of the circle.
    """
    return 3.14159 * radius ** 2
```

Type hints are not enforced at runtime, but they can be used by static type checkers (like `mypy`) and IDEs to catch
potential errors before your code runs. For example, if you have a function that is supposed to return a `float` but
you mistakenly use the returned value as if it were a `str`, the type checker will catch the error.

> [!TIP]
> Enabling type checking in VS Code
> You can enable type checking in VS Code by installing the `Pylance` extension. Then, in your `settings.json` file, add
> the following line:
>
> ```json
> "python.analysis.typeCheckingMode": "basic",
> ```
>
> Your editor will then highlight potential type errors in your code.

[Next: 8.2. Idiomatic Python](8.2.%20Idiomatic%20Python.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.0. Good Programming Techniques](8.0.%20Good%20Programming%20Techniques.md)
