ebook/CH08/8.2. Idiomatic Python.md, before:

# 8.2. Idiomatic Python

## What is idiomatic code?

Consider the function below:

```python
def get_squares(n):
    squares = []
    for i in range(n):
        squares.append(i**2)
    return squares
```

Is there anything wrong with this function? Of course not: it's a perfectly valid and reasonable way to create a list of
squares.

However, consider the following function:

```python
def get_squares(n):
    return [i**2 for i in range(n)]
```

This function is more concise and readable. It leverages a unique feature of Python — namely, _list comprehensions_ — to
achieve the same result with fewer lines of code.

Writing idiomatic Python code means taking advantage of Python's strengths to create programs that are more readable,
efficient, and "Pythonic".

Here are some commonly used idioms in Python:

## 1. List comprehensions

As we saw above, a common suboptimal code pattern involves creating an empty list, then appending to it in a loop.
Instead, you can use a list comprehension to create and populate the list in a single line.

```python
# Less idiomatic
squares = []
for i in range(10):
    squares.append(i**2)

# More idiomatic
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10)]
```

When you see this pattern — creating an empty list, then appending to it in a loop — you should immediately think about
turning it into a list comprehension. To make it more clear:

```python
# The pattern to look for
squares = [] # empty list
for i in range(10): # for loop
    squares.append(i**2) # populating the list

# The idiomatic way to do it
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10)]
# my_list = [thing_i_want for something in some_iterable if some_condition_is_met]
```

Of course, you can also add a condition to the list comprehension:

```python
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10) if i % 2 == 0] # get squares of even numbers
# my_list = [thing_i_want for something in some_iterable if some_condition_is_met]
```

And there are other types of comprehensions, like dictionary comprehensions and set comprehensions:

```python
squares = {i: i**2 for i in range(10)} # dictionary comprehension
squares = {i**2 for i in range(10)} # set comprehension
```

As well as generator expressions. These are helpful when you want to iterate over a large
collection, but don't want to create a large list in memory (this is also known as "lazy
evaluation", and we talk more about it in #9 on this list).

```python
# generator expression — a list comprehension here would blow up your computer
squares = (i**2 for i in range(1_000_000))
```

## 2. Enumerate

When you need both the index and value in a loop (which happens more often than you might think!),
use `enumerate()`:

```python
# Less idiomatic
for i in range(len(fruits)):
    print(f"{i}: {fruits[i]}")

# More idiomatic
for i, fruit in enumerate(fruits):
    print(f"{i}: {fruit}")
```

## 3. Zip

Use `zip()` to iterate over multiple lists simultaneously. This is more idiomatic than using nested
loops:

```python
names = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie']
ages = [25, 30, 35]

# Less idiomatic
for i in range(len(names)):
    print(f"{names[i]} is {ages[i]} years old")

# More idiomatic
for name, age in zip(names, ages):
    print(f"{name} is {age} years old")
```

## 4. Context managers

Use context managers (`with` statement) for resource management. This is more idiomatic than using
try/finally blocks:

```python
# Less idiomatic
f = open('file.txt', 'w')
try:
    f.write('Hello, World!')
finally:
    f.close()

# More idiomatic
with open('file.txt', 'w') as f:
    f.write('Hello, World!')
```

## 5. Truthiness

Leverage Python's "truthiness" (the ability of any object to be used like a boolean value in boolean
contexts, such as an `if` statement):

```python
# Less idiomatic
if len(my_list) > 0:
    # do something

# More idiomatic
if my_list:
    # do something
```

## 6. Default Dictionaries

Use `defaultdict` for dictionaries that are meant to have default values for every key (including
those that don't exist yet). This is more idiomatic than creating the keys and setting them to
default values yourself:

```python
from collections import defaultdict

# Less idiomatic
word_counts = {}
for word in words:
    if word not in word_counts:
        word_counts[word] = 0
    word_counts[word] += 1

# More idiomatic
word_counts = defaultdict(int)
for word in words:
    word_counts[word] += 1
```

## 7. String formatting

Use f-strings for string formatting (in Python 3.6+). To my eye, f-strings are more readable than
the alternatives:

```python
name = "Alice"
age = 30

# Less idiomatic
print("My name is " + name + " and I am " + str(age) + " years old.")

# More idiomatic
print("My name is {} and I am {} years old.".format(name, age))

# Most idiomatic
print(f"My name is {name} and I am {age} years old.")
```

## 8. Multiple assignment

Use multiple assignment for swapping variables or unpacking:

```python
# Less idiomatic
a = 1
b = 2
temp = a
a = b
b = temp

# More idiomatic: swap directly!
a, b = b, a

# Unpacking
coordinates = (1, 2, 3)
x, y, z = coordinates
```

## 9. Generator expressions

When dealing with what could be (very) large collections, use generator expressions to save memory:

```python
# List comprehension (creates full list in memory; heavy!)
sum([x**2 for x in range(1000000)])

# Generator expression (memory-efficient)
sum(x**2 for x in range(1000000))
```

## 10. The Zen of Python

Type `import this` into your editor and you will be greeted with these words of wisdom:

> Beautiful is better than ugly. <br>
> Explicit is better than implicit. <br>
> Simple is better than complex. <br>
> Complex is better than complicated. <br>
> Flat is better than nested. <br>
> Sparse is better than dense. <br>
> Readability counts. <br>
> Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules. <br>
> Although practicality beats purity. <br>
> Errors should never pass silently. <br>
> Unless explicitly silenced. <br>
> In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess. <br>
> There should be one — and preferably only one — obvious way to do it. <br>
> Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch. <br>
> Now is better than never. <br>
> Although never is often better than _right_ now. <br>
> If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea. <br>
> If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea. <br>
> Namespaces are one honking great idea — let's do more of those! <br>

When in doubt, follow (perhaps meditate on) these principles. It takes time to internalize these practices into your
coding "muscle memory", but the benefits are well worth it: you'll write code that's not only more efficient but also
more readable and maintainable. Code is read much more often than it's written, so be intentional about what you write!

[Next: 8.3. Debugging](8.3.%20Debugging.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.2. Style and Readability](8.1.%20Style%20and%20Readability.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.2 pointing to 8.4 for more tips on string formatting

ebook/CH08/8.2. Idiomatic Python.md, after:

# 8.2. Idiomatic Python

## What is idiomatic code?

Consider the function below:

```python
def get_squares(n):
    squares = []
    for i in range(n):
        squares.append(i**2)
    return squares
```

Is there anything wrong with this function? Of course not: it's a perfectly valid and reasonable way to create a list of
squares.

However, consider the following function:

```python
def get_squares(n):
    return [i**2 for i in range(n)]
```

This function is more concise and readable. It leverages a unique feature of Python — namely, _list comprehensions_ — to
achieve the same result with fewer lines of code.

Writing idiomatic Python code means taking advantage of Python's strengths to create programs that are more readable,
efficient, and "Pythonic".

Here are some commonly used idioms in Python:

## 1. List comprehensions

As we saw above, a common suboptimal code pattern involves creating an empty list, then appending to it in a loop.
Instead, you can use a list comprehension to create and populate the list in a single line.

```python
# Less idiomatic
squares = []
for i in range(10):
    squares.append(i**2)

# More idiomatic
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10)]
```

When you see this pattern — creating an empty list, then appending to it in a loop — you should immediately think about
turning it into a list comprehension. To make it more clear:

```python
# The pattern to look for
squares = [] # empty list
for i in range(10): # for loop
    squares.append(i**2) # populating the list

# The idiomatic way to do it
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10)]
# my_list = [thing_i_want for something in some_iterable if some_condition_is_met]
```

Of course, you can also add a condition to the list comprehension:

```python
squares = [i**2 for i in range(10) if i % 2 == 0] # get squares of even numbers
# my_list = [thing_i_want for something in some_iterable if some_condition_is_met]
```

And there are other types of comprehensions, like dictionary comprehensions and set comprehensions:

```python
squares = {i: i**2 for i in range(10)} # dictionary comprehension
squares = {i**2 for i in range(10)} # set comprehension
```

As well as generator expressions. These are helpful when you want to iterate over a large
collection, but don't want to create a large list in memory (this is also known as "lazy
evaluation", and we talk more about it in #9 on this list).

```python
# generator expression — a list comprehension here would blow up your computer
squares = (i**2 for i in range(1_000_000))
```

## 2. Enumerate

When you need both the index and value in a loop (which happens more often than you might think!),
use `enumerate()`:

```python
# Less idiomatic
for i in range(len(fruits)):
    print(f"{i}: {fruits[i]}")

# More idiomatic
for i, fruit in enumerate(fruits):
    print(f"{i}: {fruit}")
```

## 3. Zip

Use `zip()` to iterate over multiple lists simultaneously. This is more idiomatic than using nested
loops:

```python
names = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie']
ages = [25, 30, 35]

# Less idiomatic
for i in range(len(names)):
    print(f"{names[i]} is {ages[i]} years old")

# More idiomatic
for name, age in zip(names, ages):
    print(f"{name} is {age} years old")
```

## 4. Context managers

Use context managers (`with` statement) for resource management. This is more idiomatic than using
try/finally blocks:

```python
# Less idiomatic
f = open('file.txt', 'w')
try:
    f.write('Hello, World!')
finally:
    f.close()

# More idiomatic
with open('file.txt', 'w') as f:
    f.write('Hello, World!')
```

## 5. Truthiness

Leverage Python's "truthiness" (the ability of any object to be used like a boolean value in boolean
contexts, such as an `if` statement):

```python
# Less idiomatic
if len(my_list) > 0:
    # do something

# More idiomatic
if my_list:
    # do something
```

## 6. Default Dictionaries

Use `defaultdict` for dictionaries that are meant to have default values for every key (including
those that don't exist yet). This is more idiomatic than creating the keys and setting them to
default values yourself:

```python
from collections import defaultdict

# Less idiomatic
word_counts = {}
for word in words:
    if word not in word_counts:
        word_counts[word] = 0
    word_counts[word] += 1

# More idiomatic
word_counts = defaultdict(int)
for word in words:
    word_counts[word] += 1
```

## 7. String formatting

Use f-strings for string formatting (in Python 3.6+). To my eye, f-strings are more readable than
the alternatives:

```python
name = "Alice"
age = 30

# Less idiomatic
print("My name is " + name + " and I am " + str(age) + " years old.")

# More idiomatic
print("My name is {} and I am {} years old.".format(name, age))

# Most idiomatic
print(f"My name is {name} and I am {age} years old.")
```

You can see more advanced examples of such string formatting in [Chapter 8.4. Useful Techniques](8.4.%20Useful%20Techniques.md).

## 8. Multiple assignment

Use multiple assignment for swapping variables or unpacking:

```python
# Less idiomatic
a = 1
b = 2
temp = a
a = b
b = temp

# More idiomatic: swap directly!
a, b = b, a

# Unpacking
coordinates = (1, 2, 3)
x, y, z = coordinates
```

## 9. Generator expressions

When dealing with what could be (very) large collections, use generator expressions to save memory:

```python
# List comprehension (creates full list in memory; heavy!)
sum([x**2 for x in range(1000000)])

# Generator expression (memory-efficient)
sum(x**2 for x in range(1000000))
```

## 10. The Zen of Python

Type `import this` into your editor and you will be greeted with these words of wisdom:

> Beautiful is better than ugly. <br>
> Explicit is better than implicit. <br>
> Simple is better than complex. <br>
> Complex is better than complicated. <br>
> Flat is better than nested. <br>
> Sparse is better than dense. <br>
> Readability counts. <br>
> Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules. <br>
> Although practicality beats purity. <br>
> Errors should never pass silently. <br>
> Unless explicitly silenced. <br>
> In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess. <br>
> There should be one — and preferably only one — obvious way to do it. <br>
> Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch. <br>
> Now is better than never. <br>
> Although never is often better than _right_ now. <br>
> If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea. <br>
> If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea. <br>
> Namespaces are one honking great idea — let's do more of those! <br>

When in doubt, follow (perhaps meditate on) these principles. It takes time to internalize these practices into your
coding "muscle memory", but the benefits are well worth it: you'll write code that's not only more efficient but also
more readable and maintainable. Code is read much more often than it's written, so be intentional about what you write!

[Next: 8.3. Debugging](8.3.%20Debugging.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.2. Style and Readability](8.1.%20Style%20and%20Readability.md)
