ebook/CH08/8.3. Debugging.md, before:

# 8.3. Debugging

If you are writing code, you are almost certainly going to make mistakes. Even experienced programmers make mistakes —
constantly. Debugging is therefore an essential art to master along the coding journey: it's how you find and fix
mistakes in your code. Python provides a few tools to help with debugging, and you're already familiar with one of them:
the `print` function.

## Print statements

The humble `print()` statement is one of the most important tools for debugging. You can use it to print the values of
variables at various points in your code to see what's going wrong.

```python
def calculate_average(numbers):
    print(f"Input: {numbers}")  # Debug print
    total = sum(numbers)
    print(f"Sum: {total}")  # Debug print
    average = total / len(numbers)
    print(f"Average: {average}")  # Debug print
    return average

result = calculate_average([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
print(f"Result: {result}")
```

## Python debugger (pdb)

The Python debugger (pdb) is a powerful tool for _interactive_ debugging. It allows you to step through your code, print
the values of variables, and generally inspect the state of your program.

```python
import pdb

def complex_function(x, y):
    result = x + y
    pdb.set_trace()  # This will start the debugger
    result = result * 2
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

When the debugger starts, you can use commands like:

- `n` (next): Execute the next line
- `s` (step): Step into a function call
- `c` (continue): Continue execution until the next breakpoint
- `p variable_name`: Print the value of a variable
- `q` (quit): Quit the debugger

> [!TIP]
>
> **Debugging in your IDE**
>
> Most modern IDEs, including VS Code and PyCharm, have built-in debugging tools that can help you step through your
> code and inspect variables. These tools are often more user-friendly and feature-rich than the built-in debugger, but
> can be overkill for simple debugging tasks. For example, in VS Code, you can set breakpoints by clicking to the left
> of the line number, and step through code, print variable values, and inspect the call stack using the debugging
> toolbar. Press `F5` to run your program with debugging enabled, or press `Ctrl+F5` to start the program without
> debugging.

## `assert` yourself

_Assertions_ are a way of not merely checking that certain conditions are met, but _ensuring_ that those conditions are
met. If an assertion fails, it raises an `AssertionError`.

```python
def divide(a, b):
    assert b != 0, "Divisor cannot be zero"
    return a / b

result = divide(10, 2)  # This works fine
result = divide(10, 0)  # This will raise an AssertionError
```

## Logging

For more complex applications, using the `logging` module can be more effective than relying solely on `print`
statements. It allows you to output messages at different severity levels and to different outputs (e.g., console,
file).

```python
import logging

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)

def complex_function(x, y):
    logging.debug(f"Inputs: x={x}, y={y}")
    result = x + y
    logging.info(f"Addition result: {result}")
    result = result * 2
    logging.debug(f"Final result: {result}")
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

## PySnooper

[PySnooper](https://github.com/cool-RR/PySnooper) is a third-party library that can help you debug your code. It
provides a decorator that prints the value of every variable as they change.

```python
import pysnooper

@pysnooper.snoop()
def complex_function(x, y):
    result = x + y
    result = result * 2
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

PySnooper will output detailed information about each line executed, including:

- The line number and content
- Local variables and their values
- Return values
- Exceptions raised

This can be particularly useful when you're trying to understand the flow of a complex function or track down a bug
that's hard to reproduce.

To use PySnooper, you first need to install it:

```bash
pip install pysnooper
```

You can customize PySnooper's output by passing arguments to the `@snoop()` decorator:

```python
@pysnooper.snoop(output='debug.log', depth=2)
def complex_function(x, y):
    # ...logic goes here...
```

This will output the debug information to a file named 'debug.log' and will also show variables from one level up in the
stack.

## Common Debugging Strategies

1. **Read the error message**: Python's error messages often provide valuable information about what went wrong and
   where. Read them carefully!
2. **Reproduce the error**: Make sure you can consistently reproduce the bug. A bug that moves around is harder to
   squash.
3. **Isolate the problem**: Try to narrow down where the problem is occurring.
4. **Use binary search**: If you're not sure where the problem is, use a _binary search_ approach by adding `print`
   statements or breakpoints in the middle of (what is likely to be) the offending code and then narrowing down the
   problematic section. You can also target by semantic "chunk" (e.g., a given function).
5. **Check your assumptions**: Make sure your assumptions about variable values, function inputs, etc., are correct.
6. **Rubber duck debugging**: Explain your code line-by-line to an imaginary rubber duck (or a colleague). Often, the
   act of explaining helps you spot the issue.

Remember, debugging is as much an art as it is a science. With practice, you'll develop intuition about where your bugs are hiding and how to root them out.

[Next: 8.4. Useful Techniques](8.4.%20Useful%20Techniques.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.2. Idiomatic Python](8.2.%20Idiomatic%20Python.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.3 with comment on assertions

ebook/CH08/8.3. Debugging.md, after:

# 8.3. Debugging

If you are writing code, you are almost certainly going to make mistakes. Even experienced programmers make mistakes —
constantly. Debugging is therefore an essential art to master along the coding journey: it's how you find and fix
mistakes in your code. Python provides a few tools to help with debugging, and you're already familiar with one of them:
the `print` function.

## Print statements

The humble `print()` statement is one of the most important tools for debugging. You can use it to print the values of
variables at various points in your code to see what's going wrong.

```python
def calculate_average(numbers):
    print(f"Input: {numbers}")  # Debug print
    total = sum(numbers)
    print(f"Sum: {total}")  # Debug print
    average = total / len(numbers)
    print(f"Average: {average}")  # Debug print
    return average

result = calculate_average([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
print(f"Result: {result}")
```

## Python debugger (pdb)

The Python debugger (pdb) is a powerful tool for _interactive_ debugging. It allows you to step through your code, print
the values of variables, and generally inspect the state of your program.

```python
import pdb

def complex_function(x, y):
    result = x + y
    pdb.set_trace()  # This will start the debugger
    result = result * 2
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

When the debugger starts, you can use commands like:

- `n` (next): Execute the next line
- `s` (step): Step into a function call
- `c` (continue): Continue execution until the next breakpoint
- `p variable_name`: Print the value of a variable (e.g. `p result` for a variable named `result`)
- `q` (quit): Quit the debugger

> [!TIP]
>
> **Debugging in your IDE**
>
> Most modern IDEs, including VS Code and PyCharm, have built-in debugging tools that can help you step through your
> code and inspect variables. These tools are often more user-friendly and feature-rich than the built-in debugger, but
> can be overkill for simple debugging tasks. For example, in VS Code, you can set breakpoints by clicking to the left
> of the line number, and step through code, print variable values, and inspect the call stack using the debugging
> toolbar. Press `F5` to run your program with debugging enabled, or press `Ctrl+F5` to start the program without
> debugging.

## `assert` yourself

_Assertions_ are a way of not merely checking that certain conditions are met, but _ensuring_ that those conditions are
met. If an assertion fails, it raises an `AssertionError`.

```python
def divide(a, b):
    assert b != 0, "Divisor cannot be zero"
    return a / b

result = divide(10, 2)  # This works fine
result = divide(10, 0)  # This will raise an AssertionError
```

Assertions are a good way to catch bugs early, but they are not a substitute for good error handling
with `try`/`except` blocks.

## Logging

For more complex applications, using the `logging` module can be more effective than relying solely on `print`
statements. It allows you to output messages at different severity levels and to different outputs (e.g., console,
file).

```python
import logging

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)

def complex_function(x, y):
    logging.debug(f"Inputs: x={x}, y={y}")
    result = x + y
    logging.info(f"Addition result: {result}")
    result = result * 2
    logging.debug(f"Final result: {result}")
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

## PySnooper

[PySnooper](https://github.com/cool-RR/PySnooper) is a third-party library that can help you debug your code. It
provides a decorator that prints the value of every variable as they change.

```python
import pysnooper

@pysnooper.snoop()
def complex_function(x, y):
    result = x + y
    result = result * 2
    return result

complex_function(5, 3)
```

PySnooper will output detailed information about each line executed, including:

- The line number and content
- Local variables and their values
- Return values
- Exceptions raised

This can be particularly useful when you're trying to understand the flow of a complex function or track down a bug
that's hard to reproduce.

To use PySnooper, you first need to install it:

```bash
pip install pysnooper
```

You can customize PySnooper's output by passing arguments to the `@snoop()` decorator:

```python
@pysnooper.snoop(output='debug.log', depth=2)
def complex_function(x, y):
    # ...logic goes here...
```

This will output the debug information to a file named 'debug.log' and will also show variables from one level up in the
stack.

## Common Debugging Strategies

1. **Read the error message**: Python's error messages often provide valuable information about what went wrong and
   where. Read them carefully!
2. **Reproduce the error**: Make sure you can consistently reproduce the bug. A bug that moves around is harder to
   squash.
3. **Isolate the problem**: Try to narrow down where the problem is occurring.
4. **Use binary search**: If you're not sure where the problem is, use a _binary search_ approach by adding `print`
   statements or breakpoints in the middle of (what is likely to be) the offending code and then narrowing down the
   problematic section. You can also target by semantic "chunk" (e.g., a given function).
5. **Check your assumptions**: Make sure your assumptions about variable values, function inputs, etc., are correct.
6. **Rubber duck debugging**: Explain your code line-by-line to an imaginary rubber duck (or a colleague). Often, the
   act of explaining helps you spot the issue.

Remember, debugging is as much an art as it is a science. With practice, you'll develop intuition about where your bugs are hiding and how to root them out.

[Next: 8.4. Useful Techniques](8.4.%20Useful%20Techniques.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.2. Idiomatic Python](8.2.%20Idiomatic%20Python.md)
