ebook/CH08/8.4. Useful Techniques.md, before:

# 8.4 Useful techniques

This section covers various practical techniques that I hope you will find useful in your daily life. These patterns are
widely used in industry contexts and can significantly improve your code quality.

## Guard clauses

Imagine that you are creating a website with a user signup feature. You want to ensure that the user's password meets a
number of different criteria (e.g., it must be at least 8 characters long, contain at least one uppercase letter, at least one lowercase letter, etc.).
You could write a password-checking function that looks like this:

```python
def check_password(password):
    if len(password) < 8 or not any(char.isupper() for char in password) or not any(char.islower() for char in password):
        return False
    else:
        return True
```

However, the more criteria you add, the more difficult it becomes to read the code. This is where guard clauses come in.

Guard clauses are conditional statements at the beginning of a function that return early if certain conditions are not
met:

```python
def check_password(password):
    if len(password) < 8:
        return False
    if not any(char.isupper() for char in password):
        return False
    if not any(char.islower() for char in password):
        return False
    return True
```

And another example:

```python
# Without guard clause
def process_positive_number(num):
    if num > 0:
        # Process the number
        result = num * 2
        return result
    else:
        return None

# With guard clause
def process_positive_number(num):
    if num <= 0:
        return None
    # Process the number
    result = num * 2
    return result
```

With guard clauses, you can use _early returns_ to handle errors and edge cases, making sure that the code fails quickly, in turn helping you debug faster.

### Avoiding deep nesting

Deep nesting can make code hard to read and maintain. Try to keep your code as flat as possible.

```python
# Deeply nested
def complex_function(x):
    if x > 0:
        if x < 10:
            if x % 2 == 0:
                return "Even number between 0 and 10"
            else:
                return "Odd number between 0 and 10"
        else:
            return "Number greater than or equal to 10"
    else:
        return "Number less than or equal to 0"

# Flatter structure
def complex_function(x):
    if x <= 0:
        return "Number less than or equal to 0"
    if x >= 10:
        return "Number greater than or equal to 10"
    if x % 2 == 0:
        return "Even number between 0 and 10"
    return "Odd number between 0 and 10"
```

## Toggling Boolean variables

Recall this snippet of a function from [3.5. An Example Program](3.5.%20An%20Example%20Program.md):

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    ...
    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    if running:
        running = False
    else:
        running = True
    ...
```

Rather than using an `if` statement to toggle boolean variables, you can use the `not` operator:

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    ...
    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    running = not running
    ...
```

## Using walrus operator (:=)

The walrus operator (`:=`) allows you to assign values to variables as part of a larger expression. It can help reduce code duplication:

```python
# Without walrus operator
data = get_data()
if data:
    process_data(data)

# With walrus operator
if data := get_data():
    process_data(data)
```

## Ternary operator

The ternary operator provides a concise way to write simple if-else statements:

```python
# Long form
if x >= 0:
    y = "Positive"
else:
    y = "Negative"

# Ternary operator
y = "Positive" if x >= 0 else "Negative"
```

(I will admit that Python's ternary operator is not as elegant as those in some other languages, but it can still be useful and concise.)

I hope you find these techniques helpful when writing your own programs; all these techniques often come in handy.

[Next: 8.5. Asking Good Questions](8.5.%20Asking%20Good%20Questions.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.3. Debugging](8.3.%20Debugging.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.4 with comment on the walrus operator

ebook/CH08/8.4. Useful Techniques.md, after:

# 8.4 Useful techniques

This section covers various practical techniques that I hope you will find useful in your daily life. These patterns are
widely used in industry contexts and can significantly improve your code quality.

## Guard clauses

Imagine that you are creating a website with a user signup feature. You want to ensure that the user's password meets a
number of different criteria (e.g., it must be at least 8 characters long, contain at least one uppercase letter, at least one lowercase letter, etc.).
You could write a password-checking function that looks like this:

```python
def check_password(password):
    if len(password) < 8 or not any(char.isupper() for char in password) or not any(char.islower() for char in password):
        return False
    else:
        return True
```

However, the more criteria you add, the more difficult it becomes to read the code. This is where guard clauses come in.

Guard clauses are conditional statements at the beginning of a function that return early if certain conditions are not
met:

```python
def check_password(password):
    if len(password) < 8:
        return False
    if not any(char.isupper() for char in password):
        return False
    if not any(char.islower() for char in password):
        return False
    return True
```

Notice that we don't need to use `elif` or `else` to handle the different cases. We can just return early if the condition is not met.

Here's another example:

```python
# Without guard clause
def process_positive_number(num):
    if num > 0:
        # Process the number
        result = num * 2
        return result
    else:
        return None

# With guard clause
def process_positive_number(num):
    if num <= 0:
        return None
    # Process the number
    result = num * 2
    return result
```

With guard clauses, you can use _early returns_ to handle errors and edge cases, making sure that the code fails quickly, in turn helping you debug faster.

### Avoiding deep nesting

Deep nesting can make code hard to read and maintain. Try to keep your code as flat as possible.

```python
# Deeply nested
def complex_function(x):
    if x > 0:
        if x < 10:
            if x % 2 == 0:
                return "Even number between 0 and 10"
            else:
                return "Odd number between 0 and 10"
        else:
            return "Number greater than or equal to 10"
    else:
        return "Number less than or equal to 0"

# Flatter structure
def complex_function(x):
    if x <= 0:
        return "Number less than or equal to 0"
    if x >= 10:
        return "Number greater than or equal to 10"
    if x % 2 == 0:
        return "Even number between 0 and 10"
    return "Odd number between 0 and 10"
```

## Toggling Boolean variables

Recall this snippet of a function from [3.5. An Example Program](3.5.%20An%20Example%20Program.md):

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    ...
    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    if running:
        running = False
    else:
        running = True
    ...
```

Rather than using an `if` statement to toggle boolean variables, you can use the `not` operator:

```python
def start_stop(main_window, simulation_canvas, dimensions, agent_list, options):
    ...
    # check the state of the running variable, and toggle it. Since the button was pushed, we want to flip its state
    running = not running
    ...
```

## Using walrus operator (:=)

The walrus operator (`:=`) allows you to assign values to variables as part of a larger expression. It can help reduce code duplication:

```python
# Without walrus operator
data = get_data()
if data:
    process_data(data)

# With walrus operator
if data := get_data():
    process_data(data)
```

In practice, you will rarely use or even see the walrus operator, but it's good to know that it exists.

## Ternary operator

The ternary operator provides a concise way to write simple if-else statements:

```python
# Long form
if x >= 0:
    y = "Positive"
else:
    y = "Negative"

# Ternary operator
y = "Positive" if x >= 0 else "Negative"
```

(I will admit that Python's ternary operator is not as elegant as those in some other languages, but it can still be useful and concise.)

I hope you find these techniques helpful when writing your own programs; all these techniques often come in handy.

[Next: 8.5. Asking Good Questions](8.5.%20Asking%20Good%20Questions.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.3. Debugging](8.3.%20Debugging.md)
