ebook/CH08/8.5. Asking Good Questions.md, before:

# 8.5. Asking good questions

Sometimes, despite your best efforts, you will find yourself at an impasse while programming. You may be stymied by a
problem for hours, days, or even weeks. What do you do when you are stuck? One option (which you should try first) is to
walk away from the problem and come back to it later. Sometimes, all we need is to step away from the computer, get some
fresh air, sleep on it, and let our subconscious do what our conscious mind cannot. I have had answers come to me while
showering, while on long walks, while driving, and even in my dreams[^1]. However, if you remain blocked even after you
have taken a long break (or if you are extremely pressed for time), it may become necessary to seek help from others.

Answering just a few questions yourself can help you ask better questions of others. These are:

1. What do you want? Describe your goal in simple terms, in as much detail as is necessary to understand what you are
   trying to accomplish.
2. What went wrong? Describe the erroneous behavior you encountered. Include error messages.
3. What have you tried? Describe the approaches you have taken so far to solve the problem. Include relevant code
   snippets.
4. Why do you think the error occurred? Describe your best hypothesis (or hypotheses) for what is going wrong.
5. What don't you understand? Describe the (relevant) parts of the error message or code that you do not understand.

Imagine that your friend comes to you, asking for help with their code. Which of these two versions of your friend's
question would you find more helpful?

> I'm trying to run my program, but it doesn't work. Why's it broken?

Or:

> I'm trying to write a Python function that calculates the sum of a list of numbers,
> but it returns `None` instead of the sum. Here's my code:
>
> ```python
> def sum_numbers(numbers):
>    total = 0
>    for num in numbers:
>        total += num
>    return
> ```
>
> When I call `sum_numbers([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])`, it returns `None`, but I expect it to return `15`.
> Can you help me figure out what's going wrong?

It is clear that the latter question is better, and it's not just because it is longer. It is specific; provides
context; includes relevant code (in plain text — NOT as a screenshot); describes the expected behavior; and 
describes the erroneous behavior actually observed. But perhaps most importantly (from a sociological perspective) 
it shows that the person asking the question has already put some _effort_ into solving the problem, making 
helpful souls more inclined to offer assistance. The person asking the first question is asking for someone 
else to do the work for them. The person asking the second version of the question is seeking instruction on 
how to solve the problem themselves. In my experience, seeking instruction is a more effective strategy than 
soliciting solutions.

[^1]:
    It's not just me who's received oneiric insight: famed mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan claimed to have obtained
    some of his mathematical intuitions [from his
    dreams](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/ramanujans-mock-modular-forms_n_2371680).

[Next: 8.6. Decorators](8.6.%20Decorators.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.4. Useful Techniques](8.4.%20Useful%20Techniques.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.5 with comment on plain text vs screenshots of errors

ebook/CH08/8.5. Asking Good Questions.md, after:

# 8.5. Asking good questions

Sometimes, despite your best efforts, you will find yourself at an impasse while programming. You may be stymied by a
problem for hours, days, or even weeks. What do you do when you are stuck? One option (which you should try first) is to
walk away from the problem and come back to it later. Sometimes, all we need is to step away from the computer, get some
fresh air, sleep on it, and let our subconscious do what our conscious mind cannot. I have had answers come to me while
showering, while on long walks, while driving, and even in my dreams[^1]. However, if you remain blocked even after you
have taken a long break (or if you are extremely pressed for time), it may become necessary to seek help from others.

Answering just a few questions yourself can help you ask better questions of others. These are:

1. What do you want? Describe your goal in simple terms, in as much detail as is necessary to understand what you are
   trying to accomplish.
2. What went wrong? Describe the erroneous behavior you encountered. Include error messages and/or
   code snippets. (These should be in plain text, and not screenshots unless absolutely necessary.)
3. What have you tried? Describe the approaches you have taken so far to solve the problem. Include relevant code
   snippets.
4. Why do you think the error occurred? Describe your best hypothesis (or hypotheses) for what is going wrong.
5. What don't you understand? Describe the (relevant) parts of the error message or code that you do not understand.

Imagine that your friend comes to you, asking for help with their code. Which of these two versions of your friend's
question would you find more helpful?

> I'm trying to run my program, but it doesn't work. Why's it broken?

Or:

> I'm trying to write a Python function that calculates the sum of a list of numbers,
> but it returns `None` instead of the sum. Here's my code:
>
> ```python
> def sum_numbers(numbers):
>    total = 0
>    for num in numbers:
>        total += num
>    return
> ```
>
> When I call `sum_numbers([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])`, it returns `None`, but I expect it to return `15`.
> Can you help me figure out what's going wrong?

It is clear that the latter question is better, and it's not just because it is longer. It is specific; provides
context; includes relevant code (in plain text — NOT as a screenshot); describes the expected behavior; and 
describes the erroneous behavior actually observed. But perhaps most importantly (from a sociological perspective) 
it shows that the person asking the question has already put some _effort_ into solving the problem, making 
helpful souls more inclined to offer assistance. The person asking the first question is asking for someone 
else to do the work for them. The person asking the second version of the question is seeking instruction on 
how to solve the problem themselves. In my experience, seeking instruction is a more effective strategy than 
soliciting solutions.

[^1]:
    It's not just me who's received oneiric insight: famed mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan claimed to have obtained
    some of his mathematical intuitions [from his
    dreams](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/ramanujans-mock-modular-forms_n_2371680).

[Next: 8.6. Decorators](8.6.%20Decorators.md)<br>
[Previous: 8.4. Useful Techniques](8.4.%20Useful%20Techniques.md)
