ebook/CH08/8.8. Common Pitfalls.md, before:

# 8.8. Common Pitfalls

Even experienced programmers make mistakes! Here are some common pitfalls to watch out for, along
with ways to avoid them.

Note that, like 8.7 before it, this is section is designed more like a cheat sheet than as a
comprehensive guide to every possible pitfall you might encounter. Feel free to skim it, and come
back to it as needed. I will update this section as I encounter more common "gotchas" within the
language.

## Naming conflicts

One of the most insidious bugs you can create is a **naming conflict**. This happens when you give something (like a file or variable) the same name as something else that's already defined in Python.

### Local files vs. library names

Imagine that you are working on a project that uses the `random` module. However, in your project folder, you inadvertently create a file named `random.py` and put some code in it.

```python
# You create a file named random.py somewhere in your project
# Inside of your random.py file, you have a function that returns the number 42
def get_number():
    return 42

# Now, in another file somewhere in your project, you try to use the random module
import random
# This will fail! Python finds your local random.py instead of the standard library random module!

random_number = random.randint(1, 10)  # AttributeError: module 'random' has no attribute 'randint'
```

To avoid this, **don't name your files the same as Python standard library modules or popular third-party packages**. Some common ones to avoid:

- `random.py`
- `math.py`
- `test.py`
- `json.py`
- `datetime.py`
- `tkinter.py`
- `requests.py`
- `numpy.py`
- `pandas.py`
- `scipy.py`
- `matplotlib.py`
- `seaborn.py`
- `sklearn.py`

### Variable shadowing

Python comes with a lot of built-in functions and variables. If you try to use a variable name
that's already defined in Python, it will **shadow** (aka overwrite) the built-in function or
variable,
making it **inaccessible**.

```python
# Built-in function shadowing
list = [1, 2, 3]  # Oops! Now 'list' refers to your variable, not the list constructor!
new_list = list([4, 5, 6])  # TypeError: 'list' object is not callable

# Function parameter shadowing
def process_data(data, filter):
    # Oops! 'filter' now refers to the parameter, not the built-in filter() function
    filtered = filter(lambda x: x > 0, data)  # TypeError: 'list' object is not callable
```

## Mutable default arguments

This is a classic Python pitfall many beginners fall prey to; it's quite insidious. When you use a
_mutable object_ (like a list or dictionary) as a _default argument_, it's created once (and only
once!) when the function is defined — it does not create it anew each time the function is called.
In a sane world, it would be created anew each time the function is called, but alas, this is the
world we live in.

Instead of using a mutable object as a default argument, you should use `None` as the default and
create the object inside the function after checking if it's `None`.

```python
# Bad: The same list is shared between all function calls!
def add_item(item, items=[]):
    items.append(item)
    return items

print(add_item(1))  # [1]
print(add_item(2))  # [1, 2] -- Oops! The list is accumulating items

# Good: Use None as the default and create the list inside the function
def add_item(item, items=None):
    if items is None:
        items = []
    items.append(item)
    return items

print(add_item(1))  # [1]
print(add_item(2))  # [2] -- Good! The list is created anew each time the function is called
```

## Indentation errors

Python uses indentation (four spaces, or a tab) to define blocks of code. Inconsistent indentation
can lead to subtle bugs or syntax errors.

```python
def process_data(data):
    if data:
        result = []
        for item in data:
           result.append(item * 2)  # Notice the different indentation (3 spaces instead of 8)
        return result  # This might look right but can cause issues
    return None

# Use consistent indentation (preferably 4 spaces per level)
def process_data(data):
    if data:
        result = []
        for item in data:
            result.append(item * 2)  # Consistent 4-space indentation
        return result
    return None
```

Even more insidious are **logical indentation errors**, where the code is syntactically correct but does something different than you expect, leading to **semantic errors**.

```python
# This code has a bug! Can you spot it?
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
        return total  # Oops! This is indented at the wrong level

# The return statement is *inside* the if block, so the function
# returns after processing just one positive item!

# Here's the corrected version:
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
    return total  # Now properly indented outside the loop, so all items are processed

# Try them both:
items = [1, 2, -3, 4]
print(calculate_totals(items))  # First version returns 1
                                # Second version returns 7 (1 + 2 + 4)
```

These logical indentation errors can be particularly tricky because the code runs without syntax
errors — it just doesn't do what you expect! Always check your indentation carefully when debugging
unexpected behavior.

## Circular imports

When two modules import each other, it creates a circular import that can lead to confusing errors.

```python
# file1.py
from file2 import function2

def function1():
    return function2()

# file2.py
from file1 import function1  # Oops! This creates a circular import!

def function2():
    return function1()
```

To fix this, you should:

1. Restructure your code to avoid the circular dependency. This is the best solution! For example:

   - Move the shared functionality to a third module that both files can import
   - Combine the related functionality into a single module (perhaps a single class)
   - Rethink the design from first principles to eliminate the circular relationship

2. If restructuring isn't possible, move the import inside the function where it's needed:

```python
# file1.py
def function1():
    from file2 import function2  # Import inside the function
    return function2()

# file2.py
def function2():
    from file1 import function1  # Import inside the function
    return function1()
```

While this works, it's not ideal because (a) it makes the dependencies less obvious, (b) it can make
your code slower (imports are executed each time the function is called), and (c) it's harder to
understand what modules your code depends on.

The best solution is almost always to restructure your code to eliminate the circular dependency
entirely.

## Copy vs. reference confusion

Python variables hold _references_ to objects, _not_ the objects themselves. This can lead to
unexpected behavior with mutable objects. For example, if you copy a list, the copy is a reference
to the original list, and does not create a brand new list with copies of all the items inside. When
dealing with such mutable objects, you can use the `copy` module to create a "deep copy" (with
`copy.deepcopy()`) that creates a brand new list with copies of all the items inside.

```python
# List copying pitfall
original = [1, 2, [3, 4]]
copy = original.copy()  # Creates a shallow copy

copy[2][0] = 'three'
print(original[2][0])  # Oops — prints 'three'! The nested list is still referenced

# Use deep copy for nested structures
from copy import deepcopy
copy = deepcopy(original)
copy[2][0] = 'three'
print(copy[2][0])  # 'three'
print(original[2][0])  # Still 3, as expected
```

## String concatenation in loops

Recall that strings are immutable. This means they cannot be changed. If you try to build complex
strings by concatenation in a loop, you'll create a new string object in each iteration, which is
highly inefficient. Instead, you should use a list to collect the strings and then join them at the
end.

```python
# Bad: Creates a new string object in each iteration — slow and memory-intensive
result = ""
for i in range(1000):
    result += str(i)

# Good: Use join() or list comprehension
result = "".join(str(i) for i in range(1000))
```

## Global variables

Using global variables can make code harder to understand and maintain.

```python
# Bad: Global variable
counter = 0  # global variable

def increment_counter():
    global counter  # This makes the function depend on external state
    counter += 1
    return counter

counter = increment_counter()


# Better: Pass the value as a parameter
counter = 0

def increment_counter(value):
    return value + 1

counter = increment_counter(counter)
```

## Not closing files

Forgetting to close files can lead to resource leaks! To get around this, you can use a context manager, which handles
the proper behavior for entering and exiting the block.

```python
# Bad: File might not get closed if an error occurs
f = open('data.txt', 'r')
data = f.read()
f.close()

# Good: Use a context manager
with open('data.txt', 'r') as f:
    data = f.read()
# File is automatically closed after the with block!
```

## Return statement misuse

One of the most common mistakes beginners make involves the `return` statement - either using it incorrectly or
forgetting to use it entirely.

### Forgetting to return values

When a function doesn't explicitly return anything, it implicitly returns `None`. This can lead to unexpected behavior:

```python
def add_numbers(a, b):
    result = a + b
    # Oops! Forgot to return result

sum = add_numbers(5, 3)
print(sum)  # Prints None, not 8!

# Fixed version:
def add_numbers(a, b):
    result = a + b
    return result  # Now it returns the actual sum

result = add_numbers(5, 3) # puts 8 into the result variable
print(result)  # Prints 8 in the terminal, as expected
```

Remember that every function in Python returns a value! If you don't explicitly return a value, the function will return
`None`. The humble `print` statement is a function, too, and it returns `None`. Unfortunately, people often try to save
the result of `print` in a variable, when in fact they want to use the value they put inside of `print` instead.

```python
def greet():
    greeting = print("Hello, world!") # oops! We are not putting the string into the greeting variable!
    return greeting # this is None!

result = greet()  # Prints "Hello, world!" to the terminal, but puts `None` into the result variable
print(result)  # shows nothing in the terminal here — but because we saw "Hello, world!" in the terminal before, we may be confused!
```

### Using return outside functions

Another common mistake is trying to use `return` statements outside of functions. This often happens when students are
first learning about scripts vs. modules:

```python
# script.py
x = 5 + 3
return x  # SyntaxError: 'return' outside function

# Correct way - wrap it in a function:
def calculate():
    x = 5 + 3
    return x

# If you want to run this code when the script is executed directly:
if __name__ == "__main__":
    result = calculate()
    print(result)
```

This error sometimes occurs in combination with the logical indentation errors mentioned above!

```python
# This code has a bug! Can you spot it?
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
return total  # Oops! This is indented at the wrong level -- in this case, it's outside the function!

# This will yield a SyntaxError!

# Here's the corrected version:
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
    return total  # Now properly indented within the function, but after the loop, so all items are processed
```

The `if __name__ == "__main__":` statement is crucial here because it helps distinguish between:

- When your file is being run directly as a script (e.g., if you have a `script.py` file and run it via `python script.py` from your terminal)
- When your file is being imported as a module by another file (e.g., if you have a `helper.py` file and run `import
helper` from within another file)

Without this statement, any code at the module level (outside functions) will run immediately when the file is imported,
which can lead to unexpected behavior. Here's why this matters:

```python
# within your helper.py file
def useful_function()
    return "I'm helpful!"

print("This will run when helper.py is imported!")  # Probably not what we want

# within your main.py file
import helper  # Oops! The print statement in helper.py runs immediately!
# This might not be what we intended...


# Here's a better version of helper.py:
def useful_function():
    return "I'm helpful!"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # This only runs if helper.py is run directly
    print("Running helper.py as a script")
    print(useful_function())
```

Remember: If you need code to run when your file is executed directly (but not when it's imported), put that code inside
the `if __name__ == "__main__":` block.

## Conclusion

Remember, these pitfalls are common enough that most Python developers (including myself!) have encountered them at some
point. You probably will, too! The key is not to try to avoid every possible mistake, because that's impossible and
counter-productive. I expect that you will actually learn more slowly if you try to be too defensive. Instead, we strive
to learn from our mistakes to develop good habits that help us avoid them in the future.

[Next: TODO]<br>
[Previous: 8.7. Common Patterns](8.7.%20Common%20Patterns.md)

Commit message:

Update 8.8 with comments on main() and why it's useful

ebook/CH08/8.8. Common Pitfalls.md, after:

# 8.8. Common Pitfalls

Even experienced programmers make mistakes! Here are some common pitfalls to watch out for, along
with ways to avoid them.

Note that, like 8.7 before it, this is section is designed more like a cheat sheet than as a
comprehensive guide to every possible pitfall you might encounter. Feel free to skim it, and come
back to it as needed. I will update this section as I encounter more common "gotchas" within the
language.

## Naming conflicts

One of the most insidious bugs you can create is a **naming conflict**. This happens when you give something (like a file or variable) the same name as something else that's already defined in Python.

### Local files vs. library names

Imagine that you are working on a project that uses the `random` module. However, in your project folder, you inadvertently create a file named `random.py` and put some code in it.

```python
# You create a file named random.py somewhere in your project
# Inside of your random.py file, you have a function that returns the number 42
def get_number():
    return 42

# Now, in another file somewhere in your project, you try to use the random module
import random
# This will fail! Python finds your local random.py instead of the standard library random module!

random_number = random.randint(1, 10)  # AttributeError: module 'random' has no attribute 'randint'
```

To avoid this, **don't name your files the same as Python standard library modules or popular third-party packages**. Some common ones to avoid:

- `random.py`
- `math.py`
- `test.py`
- `json.py`
- `datetime.py`
- `tkinter.py`
- `requests.py`
- `numpy.py`
- `pandas.py`
- `scipy.py`
- `matplotlib.py`
- `seaborn.py`
- `sklearn.py`

### Variable shadowing

Python comes with a lot of built-in functions and variables. If you try to use a variable name
that's already defined in Python, it will **shadow** (aka overwrite) the built-in function or
variable,
making it **inaccessible**.

```python
# Built-in function shadowing
list = [1, 2, 3]  # Oops! Now 'list' refers to your variable, not the list constructor!
new_list = list([4, 5, 6])  # TypeError: 'list' object is not callable

# Function parameter shadowing
def process_data(data, filter):
    # Oops! 'filter' now refers to the parameter, not the built-in filter() function
    filtered = filter(lambda x: x > 0, data)  # TypeError: 'list' object is not callable
```

## Mutable default arguments

This is a classic Python pitfall many beginners fall prey to; it's quite insidious. When you use a
_mutable object_ (like a list or dictionary) as a _default argument_, it's created once (and only
once!) when the function is defined — it does not create it anew each time the function is called.
In a sane world, it would be created anew each time the function is called, but alas, this is the
world we live in.

Instead of using a mutable object as a default argument, you should use `None` as the default and
create the object inside the function after checking if it's `None`.

```python
# Bad: The same list is shared between all function calls!
def add_item(item, items=[]):
    items.append(item)
    return items

print(add_item(1))  # [1]
print(add_item(2))  # [1, 2] -- Oops! The list is accumulating items

# Good: Use None as the default and create the list inside the function
def add_item(item, items=None):
    if items is None:
        items = []
    items.append(item)
    return items

print(add_item(1))  # [1]
print(add_item(2))  # [2] -- Good! The list is created anew each time the function is called
```

## Indentation errors

Python uses indentation (four spaces, or a tab) to define blocks of code. Inconsistent indentation
can lead to subtle bugs or syntax errors.

```python
def process_data(data):
    if data:
        result = []
        for item in data:
           result.append(item * 2)  # Notice the different indentation (3 spaces instead of 8)
        return result  # This might look right but can cause issues
    return None

# Use consistent indentation (preferably 4 spaces per level)
def process_data(data):
    if data:
        result = []
        for item in data:
            result.append(item * 2)  # Consistent 4-space indentation
        return result
    return None
```

Even more insidious are **logical indentation errors**, where the code is syntactically correct but does something different than you expect, leading to **semantic errors**.

```python
# This code has a bug! Can you spot it?
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
        return total  # Oops! This is indented at the wrong level

# The return statement is *inside* the if block, so the function
# returns after processing just one positive item!

# Here's the corrected version:
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
    return total  # Now properly indented outside the loop, so all items are processed

# Try them both:
items = [1, 2, -3, 4]
print(calculate_totals(items))  # First version returns 1
                                # Second version returns 7 (1 + 2 + 4)
```

These logical indentation errors can be particularly tricky because the code runs without syntax
errors — it just doesn't do what you expect! Always check your indentation carefully when debugging
unexpected behavior.

## Circular imports

When two modules import each other, it creates a circular import that can lead to confusing errors.

```python
# file1.py
from file2 import function2

def function1():
    return function2()

# file2.py
from file1 import function1  # Oops! This creates a circular import!

def function2():
    return function1()
```

To fix this, you should:

1. Restructure your code to avoid the circular dependency. This is the best solution! For example:

   - Move the shared functionality to a third module that both files can import
   - Combine the related functionality into a single module (perhaps a single class)
   - Rethink the design from first principles to eliminate the circular relationship

2. If restructuring isn't possible, move the import inside the function where it's needed:

```python
# file1.py
def function1():
    from file2 import function2  # Import inside the function
    return function2()

# file2.py
def function2():
    from file1 import function1  # Import inside the function
    return function1()
```

While this works, it's not ideal because (a) it makes the dependencies less obvious, (b) it can make
your code slower (imports are executed each time the function is called), and (c) it's harder to
understand what modules your code depends on.

The best solution is almost always to restructure your code to eliminate the circular dependency
entirely.

## Copy vs. reference confusion

Python variables hold _references_ to objects, _not_ the objects themselves. This can lead to
unexpected behavior with mutable objects. For example, if you copy a list, the copy is a reference
to the original list, and does not create a brand new list with copies of all the items inside. When
dealing with such mutable objects, you can use the `copy` module to create a "deep copy" (with
`copy.deepcopy()`) that creates a brand new list with copies of all the items inside.

```python
# List copying pitfall
original = [1, 2, [3, 4]]
copy = original.copy()  # Creates a shallow copy

copy[2][0] = 'three'
print(original[2][0])  # Oops — prints 'three'! The nested list is still referenced

# Use deep copy for nested structures
from copy import deepcopy
copy = deepcopy(original)
copy[2][0] = 'three'
print(copy[2][0])  # 'three'
print(original[2][0])  # Still 3, as expected
```

## String concatenation in loops

Recall that strings are immutable. This means they cannot be changed. If you try to build complex
strings by concatenation in a loop, you'll create a new string object in each iteration, which is
highly inefficient. Instead, you should use a list to collect the strings and then join them at the
end.

```python
# Bad: Creates a new string object in each iteration — slow and memory-intensive
result = ""
for i in range(1000):
    result += str(i)

# Good: Use join() or list comprehension
result = "".join(str(i) for i in range(1000))
```

## Global variables

Using global variables can make code harder to understand and maintain.

```python
# Bad: Global variable
counter = 0  # global variable

def increment_counter():
    global counter  # This makes the function depend on external state
    counter += 1
    return counter

counter = increment_counter()


# Better: Pass the value as a parameter
counter = 0

def increment_counter(value):
    return value + 1

counter = increment_counter(counter)
```

## Not closing files

Forgetting to close files can lead to resource leaks! To get around this, you can use a context manager, which handles
the proper behavior for entering and exiting the block.

```python
# Bad: File might not get closed if an error occurs
f = open('data.txt', 'r')
data = f.read()
f.close()

# Good: Use a context manager
with open('data.txt', 'r') as f:
    data = f.read()
# File is automatically closed after the with block!
```

## Return statement misuse

One of the most common mistakes beginners make involves the `return` statement - either using it incorrectly or
forgetting to use it entirely.

### Forgetting to return values

When a function doesn't explicitly return anything, it implicitly returns `None`. This can lead to unexpected behavior:

```python
def add_numbers(a, b):
    result = a + b
    # Oops! Forgot to return result

sum = add_numbers(5, 3)
print(sum)  # Prints None, not 8!

# Fixed version:
def add_numbers(a, b):
    result = a + b
    return result  # Now it returns the actual sum

result = add_numbers(5, 3) # puts 8 into the result variable
print(result)  # Prints 8 in the terminal, as expected
```

Remember that every function in Python returns a value! If you don't explicitly return a value, the function will return
`None`. The humble `print` statement is a function, too, and it returns `None`. Unfortunately, people often try to save
the result of `print` in a variable, when in fact they want to use the value they put inside of `print` instead.

```python
def greet():
    greeting = print("Hello, world!") # oops! We are not putting the string into the greeting variable!
    return greeting # this is None!

result = greet()  # Prints "Hello, world!" to the terminal, but puts `None` into the result variable
print(result)  # shows nothing in the terminal here — but because we saw "Hello, world!" in the terminal before, we may be confused!
```

### Using return outside functions

Another common mistake is trying to use `return` statements outside of functions. This often happens when students are
first learning about scripts vs. modules:

```python
# script.py
x = 5 + 3
return x  # SyntaxError: 'return' outside function

# Correct way - wrap it in a function:
def calculate():
    x = 5 + 3
    return x

# If you want to run this code when the script is executed directly:
if __name__ == "__main__":
    result = calculate()
    print(result)
```

This error sometimes occurs in combination with the logical indentation errors mentioned above!

```python
# This code has a bug! Can you spot it?
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
return total  # Oops! This is indented at the wrong level -- in this case, it's outside the function!

# This will yield a SyntaxError!

# Here's the corrected version:
def calculate_totals(items):
    total = 0
    for item in items:
        if item > 0:
            total += item
            print(f"Added {item} to total")
    return total  # Now properly indented within the function, but after the loop, so all items are processed
```

The `if __name__ == "__main__":` statement is crucial here because it helps distinguish between:

- When your file is being run directly as a script (e.g., if you have a `script.py` file and run it via `python script.py` from your terminal)
- When your file is being imported as a module by another file (e.g., if you have a `helper.py` file and run `import
helper` from within another file)

Without this statement, any code at the module level (outside functions) will run immediately when the file is imported,
which can lead to unexpected behavior. Here's why this matters:

```python
# within your helper.py file
def useful_function()
    return "I'm helpful!"

print("This will run when helper.py is imported!")  # Probably not what we want

# within your main.py file
import helper  # Oops! The print statement in helper.py runs immediately!
# This might not be what we intended...


# Here's a better version of helper.py:
def useful_function():
    return "I'm helpful!"

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # This only runs if helper.py is run directly
    print("Running helper.py as a script")
    print(useful_function())
```

Remember: If you need code to run when your file is executed directly (but not when it's imported), put that code inside
the `if __name__ == "__main__":` block.

### Scripts that do nothing

Often, I see students write scripts that just define a number of functions without calling them. If you do not call or invoke the functions, nothing will happen.

```python
# Bad: This code will do nothing when it is run
# This is the whole file.
def main():
    # your code goes here

# there is no output when you run this script!
```

To avoid this pitfall, start a new script by writing a function called `main()` which will contain the primary logic of
the program, and then call that function from the `if __name__ == "__main__":` block. Otherwise, if you just define some
functions but don't call them, nothing will happen when you run the script!

```python
# Better: write the main function and then call it within the if __name__ == "__main__": block
def main():
    # your code goes here

# This will now run the main function when you run the script
if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

## Conclusion

Remember, these pitfalls are common enough that most Python developers (including myself!) have encountered them at some
point. You probably will, too! The key is not to try to avoid every possible mistake, because that's impossible and
counter-productive. I expect that you will actually learn more slowly if you try to be too defensive. Instead, we strive
to learn from our mistakes to develop good habits that help us avoid them in the future.

[Next: TODO]<br>
[Previous: 8.7. Common Patterns](8.7.%20Common%20Patterns.md)
