ebook/CH04/4.0. Sets.md, before:

# 4.0 Sets

This week we're introducing two new data structures: sets and dictionaries. Let's start with sets,
as they are the simpler of the two.

A set in Python is just like what you have learned about in math class way back in the day: a
collection of unique items. So a set is really a lot like a list, except that it cannot have
duplicates, and it isn't ordered (meaning you can't access items by index, like `my_animals[2]`).
Sets can be of any data type: int, float, string, boolean, even lists and other sets.

## Creating sets

To declare an empty set and then add items to it in Python:

```python
my_animals = set()

my_animals.add("dog")
my_animals.add("cat")
my_animals.add("lion")
my_animals.add("giraffe")
my_animals.add("giraffe")  # giraffe was added twice, but because its a set this will be ignored.
```

If you print a set, it prints out inside curly brackets:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
print(my_animals)
'''
the above command will generate:
{'dog', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'cat'}
'''
```

You can also create with items in it like you can with a list; just use curly brackets instead of square brackets:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
print(my_animals)
'''
the above command will generate:
{'dog', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'cat'}
'''
```

Notice that when we print a set, its members are not in the order they were inserted, nor are they
are in alphabetical order. They are actually in there in an order that makes it super-fast for
python to search for them (what is called a "hash"). In [5.2](../CH05/5.2.%20Sorting%20Lists.md)
we'll show you how you can sort them if you want.

You can also convert other data structures, like tuples and lists, into sets, thereby removing the
duplicates. You do this by passing the list into the set definition.

```python
animal_list = ["lion", "lion", "tiger", "dog", "cat"]
animal_set = set(animal_list)
```

Notice that the set definition looks like a function: it has parentheses and can be passed an
argument. It is a function! If you don't provide it with an argument, it creates an empty set by
default. Otherwise, it creates a set out of whatever you give it.

## Accessing set members

Because sets are not officially ordered, you CANNOT access items in a set like a list, with a
number:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}

# Let's try to access the third item in the set
my_animals[2]  # Oops! This would generate an error!
# Sets are UNORDERED, so there is no zeroth item, much less a third item!
```

Instead, the main way to access elements of a set is to set up a for loop with the set as the
iterator. You can also use the `if` statement to see if an item is in a set.

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
for item in my_animals:
    print(item)

the_animal = "lion"
if the_animal in my_animals:
    print(the_animal)
```

## Set methods

Sets have a bunch of methods (in addition to `.add()`), just like lists.

```python
my_animals = set(['dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe'])
your_animals = {'dog', 'mouse', 'giraffe', 'elephant'}

my_animals.add({'bear', 'dolphin'})  # Adds an element to the set. Note you can add other sets
my_animals.discard('lion')	# Removes the specified item; does nothing if not in set
my_animals.remove('lion')	#  Removes the specified element; or gives error if not in set
my_animals.clear()  # Removes all elements from set

# Resetting my_animals
my_animals = set(['dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe'])
the_copy = my_animals.copy()  # Gives you a copy of the set

the_diff = my_animals.difference(your_animals)  # Returns a set containing the difference between two or more sets
# result would be the set {'cat', 'lion'}, the stuff in the set the method was used for that aren't in the one passed in
the_diff = your_animals.difference(my_animals)
# result would be {'mouse', 'elephant'}

our_animals = my_animals.union(your_animals)	# Returns a set containing the union of the two sets
the_intersection = my_animals.intersection(your_animals)  # Returns a set that is the intersection of the two sets
# the result would be the set {'dog', 'lion'}, assuming lion hadn't been removed or my_animals cleared
my_animals.symmetric_difference(your_animals)	# Returns a set with all items not in both sets
# the result would be the set {'cat', 'lion', 'mouse', 'elephant'

is_disjoint = my_animals.isdisjoint(your_animals)	# Returns T/F, whether two sets have an intersection or not
my_animals.issubset(your_animals)	# Returns T/F, whether another set contains this set or not
my_animals.issuperset(your_animals)	#  Returns whether this set contains another set or not
```

Many of these methods can also be run across multiple sets at once. Here are a few examples:

```python
# let's make three sets. First, we'll use the set keyword to make a set from a list
my_animals = set(["dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"])
your_animals = {"dog", "mouse", "giraffe", "elephant"} # using curly brackets to make a set
their_animals = {"dog", "lion", "tiger", "elephant"}

my_sets = [my_animals, your_animals, their_animals]

# we can use set.union to get all the possible animals from all three sets
# we can do this by passing all the sets as arguments
all_animals = set.union(my_animals, your_animals, their_animals)
# returns the set {'dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'mouse', 'elephant', 'tiger'}
# though the order you see may differ, since sets are unordered collections

# we can get all the animals held in common with set.intersection
# here we are unpacking the sets with the * operator
common_animals = set.intersection(*my_sets)
# returns {'dog'} since only dog is in all three sets
```

Next: [4.1. Dictionaries](4.1.%20Dictionaries.md)<br>
Previous: [3.7. Homework 2](../CH03/3.7.%20Homework%203.md)

Commit message:

Update 4.0 fix link to section explaining the workaround for sorting sets, and also include explanation of the workaround

ebook/CH04/4.0. Sets.md, after:

# 4.0 Sets

This week we're introducing two new data structures: sets and dictionaries. Let's start with sets,
as they are the simpler of the two.

A set in Python is just like what you have learned about in math class way back in the day: a
collection of unique items. So a set is really a lot like a list, except that it cannot have
duplicates, and it isn't ordered (meaning you can't access items by index, like `my_animals[2]`).
Sets can be of any data type: int, float, string, boolean, even lists and other sets.

## Creating sets

To declare an empty set and then add items to it in Python:

```python
my_animals = set()

my_animals.add("dog")
my_animals.add("cat")
my_animals.add("lion")
my_animals.add("giraffe")
my_animals.add("giraffe")  # giraffe was added twice, but because its a set this will be ignored.
```

If you print a set, it prints out inside curly brackets:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
print(my_animals)
'''
the above command will generate:
{'dog', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'cat'}
'''
```

You can also create with items in it like you can with a list; just use curly brackets instead of square brackets:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
print(my_animals)
'''
the above command will generate:
{'dog', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'cat'}
'''
```

Notice that when we print a set, its members are not in the order they were inserted, nor are they
in alphabetical order. This is because sets are *unordered*, and the order you see is an
implementation detail that depends on "hashing" (which helps Python check for membership quickly).

Alas, you can't sort a set in-place, but there is a workaround: you can make a sorted **list** of
the set's elements using the `sorted()` function:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
sorted_animals = sorted(my_animals)
print(sorted_animals)  # ['cat', 'dog', 'giraffe', 'lion']
```

This trick will come up again in [4.2. Sequence Tricks](4.2.%20Sequence%20Tricks.md).

Just as we can convert sets to lists, the opposite is also true: you can convert other data
structures, like tuples and lists, into sets, thereby removing the duplicates. You do this by
passing the list into the `set()` definition.

```python
animal_list = ["lion", "lion", "tiger", "dog", "cat"]
animal_set = set(animal_list)
```

Notice that the set definition looks like a function: it has parentheses and can be passed an
argument. It is a function! If you don't provide it with an argument, it creates an empty set by
default (so `set()` is equivalent to `set([])`). Otherwise, it creates a set out of whatever you
give it as input.

## Accessing set members

Because sets are not officially ordered, you CANNOT access items in a set like a list, with a
number:

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}

# Let's try to access the third item in the set
my_animals[2]  # Oops! This would generate an error!
# Sets are UNORDERED, so there is no zeroth item, much less a third item!
```

Instead, the main way to access elements of a set is to set up a for loop with the set as the
iterator. You can also use the `if` statement to see if an item is in a set.

```python
my_animals = {"dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"}
for item in my_animals:
    print(item)

the_animal = "lion"
if the_animal in my_animals:
    print(the_animal)
```

## Set methods

Sets have a bunch of methods (in addition to `.add()`), just like lists.

```python
my_animals = set(['dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe'])
your_animals = {'dog', 'mouse', 'giraffe', 'elephant'}

my_animals.add({'bear', 'dolphin'})  # Adds an element to the set. Note you can add other sets
my_animals.discard('lion')	# Removes the specified item; does nothing if not in set
my_animals.remove('lion')	#  Removes the specified element; or gives error if not in set
my_animals.clear()  # Removes all elements from set

# Resetting my_animals
my_animals = set(['dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe'])
the_copy = my_animals.copy()  # Gives you a copy of the set

the_diff = my_animals.difference(your_animals)  # Returns a set containing the difference between two or more sets
# result would be the set {'cat', 'lion'}, the stuff in the set the method was used for that aren't in the one passed in
the_diff = your_animals.difference(my_animals)
# result would be {'mouse', 'elephant'}

our_animals = my_animals.union(your_animals)	# Returns a set containing the union of the two sets
the_intersection = my_animals.intersection(your_animals)  # Returns a set that is the intersection of the two sets
# the result would be the set {'dog', 'lion'}, assuming lion hadn't been removed or my_animals cleared
my_animals.symmetric_difference(your_animals)	# Returns a set with all items not in both sets
# the result would be the set {'cat', 'lion', 'mouse', 'elephant'

is_disjoint = my_animals.isdisjoint(your_animals)	# Returns T/F, whether two sets have an intersection or not
my_animals.issubset(your_animals)	# Returns T/F, whether another set contains this set or not
my_animals.issuperset(your_animals)	#  Returns whether this set contains another set or not
```

Many of these methods can also be run across multiple sets at once. Here are a few examples:

```python
# let's make three sets. First, we'll use the set keyword to make a set from a list
my_animals = set(["dog", "cat", "lion", "giraffe"])
your_animals = {"dog", "mouse", "giraffe", "elephant"} # using curly brackets to make a set
their_animals = {"dog", "lion", "tiger", "elephant"}

my_sets = [my_animals, your_animals, their_animals]

# we can use set.union to get all the possible animals from all three sets
# we can do this by passing all the sets as arguments
all_animals = set.union(my_animals, your_animals, their_animals)
# returns the set {'dog', 'cat', 'lion', 'giraffe', 'mouse', 'elephant', 'tiger'}
# though the order you see may differ, since sets are unordered collections

# we can get all the animals held in common with set.intersection
# here we are unpacking the sets with the * operator
common_animals = set.intersection(*my_sets)
# returns {'dog'} since only dog is in all three sets
```

Next: [4.1. Dictionaries](4.1.%20Dictionaries.md)<br>
Previous: [3.7. Homework 2](../CH03/3.7.%20Homework%203.md)
