ebook/CH04/4.2. Sequence Tricks.md, before:

# 4.2 Sequence tricks

Now that we have covered all of our basic data types in Python, let's talk about a few more tricks.

## Sorting data structures

We've already sorted lists. You can use the same trick to sort sets and dictionaries.

Now remember that sets are not ordered, so sorting it converts it into a list.

```python
my_animals = {'dog', 'lion', 'mouse', 'cat'}
sorted_animals = sorted(my_animals)
print(sorted_animals)
# results in ['cat', 'dog', 'lion', 'mouse']
```

It sorts alphabetically, you can sort in reverse by adding a reverse argument.

```python
my_animals = {'dog', 'lion', 'mouse', 'cat'}
sorted_animals = sorted(my_animals, reverse=True)
print(sorted_animals)
# results in ['mouse', 'lion', 'dog', 'cat']
```

You can sort dictionaries too, but it is a little more complicated since it is a key-value pair. But remember that we
can use the `.keys()`, `.values()`, and `.items()` methods to get lists of the keys, values, or key-value pairs. We can
then sort them the same way we do lists.

```python
animal_populations = {'dog': 471000000, 'cat': 600000000, 'bee': 2000000000000, 'human': 8000000000}
animals = sorted(animal_populations.keys())
populations = sorted(animal_populations.values())
populations = sorted(animal_populations.items())
```

Remember that `.items()` creates tuples with the key and then the value, so this will sort the tuples by the key. But if
we wanted them sorted by the value we can do that too:

```python
animal_populations = {'dog': 471000000, 'cat': 600000000, 'bee': 2000000000000, 'human': 8000000000}
sorted(animal_populations.items(), key=lambda item: item[1])
```

This is another case of using the lambda expression we had to use in the Tkinter button. Basically we can use this
lambda expression to tell it what index of the tuples that we want to sort by. Using `[1]` sorts by the second slot, the
values from the dictionary. Using `[0]` would have sorted by the keys.

Next: [4.3. JSON Files](4.3.%20JSON%20Files.md)<br>
Previous: [4.1. Dictionaries](4.1.%20Dictionaries.md)

Commit message:

Update 4.2 with tips on lambda functions

ebook/CH04/4.2. Sequence Tricks.md, after:

# 4.2 Sequence tricks

Now that we have covered all of our basic data types in Python, let's talk about a few more tricks.

## Sorting data structures

We've already sorted lists. You can use the same trick to sort sets and dictionaries.

Now remember that sets are not ordered, so sorting it converts it into a list.

```python
my_animals = {'dog', 'lion', 'mouse', 'cat'}
sorted_animals = sorted(my_animals)
print(sorted_animals)
# results in ['cat', 'dog', 'lion', 'mouse']
```

It sorts alphabetically, you can sort in reverse by adding a reverse argument.

```python
my_animals = {'dog', 'lion', 'mouse', 'cat'}
sorted_animals = sorted(my_animals, reverse=True)
print(sorted_animals)
# results in ['mouse', 'lion', 'dog', 'cat']
```

You can sort dictionaries too, but it is a little more complicated since it is a key-value pair. But remember that we
can use the `.keys()`, `.values()`, and `.items()` methods to get lists of the keys, values, or key-value pairs. We can
then sort them the same way we do lists.

```python
animal_populations = {'dog': 471000000, 'cat': 600000000, 'bee': 2000000000000, 'human': 8000000000}
animals = sorted(animal_populations.keys())
populations = sorted(animal_populations.values())
populations = sorted(animal_populations.items())
```

Remember that `.items()` creates tuples with the key and then the value, so this will sort the tuples by the key. But if
we wanted them sorted by the value we can do that too:

```python
animal_populations = {'dog': 471000000, 'cat': 600000000, 'bee': 2000000000000, 'human': 8000000000}
sorted(animal_populations.items(), key=lambda item: item[1])
```

This is another case of using the lambda expression we had to use in the Tkinter button. Basically we can use this
lambda expression to tell it what index of the tuples that we want to sort by. Using `[1]` sorts by the second slot, the
values from the dictionary. Using `[0]` would have sorted by the keys.

> [!TIP] Lambda functions
> Lambda functions are small, anonymous functions that can be created on-the-fly. Think of them as tiny, single-use functions. The syntax is:
>
> ```python
> lambda arguments: expression_to_return
> ```
>
> For example:
>
> ```python
> # A standard, regular function
> def add_one(x):
>     return x + 1
>
> # We can write the same thing as a lambda function
> add_one = lambda x: x + 1
> ```
>
> Lambda functions are particularly useful when you need a simple function for a short time, like in sorting or
> filtering operations. They can take multiple arguments too:
>
> ```python
> multiply = lambda x, y: x * y
> multiply(2, 3)  # Returns 6
> ```

Next: [4.3. JSON Files](4.3.%20JSON%20Files.md)<br>
Previous: [4.1. Dictionaries](4.1.%20Dictionaries.md)
