ebook/CH04/4.3. JSON Files.md, before:

# 4.3. JSON files

Dictionaries are very useful, and used all the time, especially once you start embedding other data structures in them.
They can effectively be a database.

```python
animal_dictionary = {
    "leo": {
        "common name": "lion",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has a mane", "lives in groups", "has bad stamina"],
        "subspecies": ["leo", "melanochaita"],
    },
    "tigris": {
        "common name": "tiger",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has stripes", "lives in Asia", "likes to swim"],
        "subspecies": ["tigris", "sondaica"],
    },
    "pardus": {
        "common name": "leopard",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has spots", "likes to climb trees", "is solitary"],
        "subspecies": [
            "pardus",
            "fusca",
            "melas",
            "nimr",
            "tulliana",
            "orientalis",
            "delacouri",
            "kotiya",
        ],
    },
    "onca": {
        "common name": "jaguar",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["lives in Americas", "has spots", "nocturnal"],
        "subspecies": [],
    },
    "uncia": {
        "common name": "snow leopard",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["is white", "has spots", "likes the cold"],
        "subspecies": [],
    },
}
```

This dictionary has species names as its keys, and its values are themselves dictionaries that all share the same
keys:

- common name (whose value is a string)
- genus (whose value is a string)
- features (whose value is a list)
- subspecies (whose value is a list).

You can imagine that we might often want to write data that we store in dictionaries to a file, but preserve the same
format and organization, and then be able to re-import it back into the same dictionary format. Imagine trying to write
a program that would do this. It would be pretty complicated!

Luckily someone has already done that hard work for us. A special kind of file was developed that is called
a _JSON file_. JSON is short for "JavaScript Object Notation", because the file format was first developed to be able
to solve this exact same problem in the JavaScript langauge. But the JSON file format became popular and used more
generally, and so most popular programming languages have developed a way to read files to that format.

## Creating JSON files

To make this work, what we really want to do is convert a dictionary (and all its parts) into a string, and then write
that string to a file. The json module does that first part for us, and then we can just use normal file writing to
create the file.

```python
import json

animal_json_string = json.dumps(animal_dictionary)

with open("animal_data.json", "w") as animal_file:
    animal_file.write(animal_json_string)
```

The `json.dumps()` function creates a string that includes all the quotes, colons, commas, and brackets (square and
squiggly) that identify the keys and values of the dictionary, and the kinds of data structures that were stored in each
one. So when we write the file, we get this:

```json
{
  "leo": {
    "common name": "lion",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has a mane", "lives in groups", "has bad stamina"],
    "subspecies": ["leo", "melanochaita"]
  },
  "tigris": {
    "common name": "tiger",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has stripes", "lives in Asia", "likes to swim"],
    "subspecies": ["tigris", "sondaica"]
  },
  "pardus": {
    "common name": "leopard",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has spots", "likes to climb trees", "is solitary"],
    "subspecies": [
      "pardus",
      "fusca",
      "melas",
      "nimr",
      "tulliana",
      "orientalis",
      "delacouri",
      "kotiya"
    ]
  },
  "onca": {
    "common name": "jaguar",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["lives in Americas", "has spots", "nocturnal"],
    "subspecies": []
  },
  "uncia": {
    "common name": "snow leopard",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["is white", "has spots", "likes the cold"],
    "subspecies": []
  }
}
```

It's just one big string, with no formatting, no line breaks, other than what you get from automatic text-wrapping. If
you open a `.json` file in most code editing software (like sublime text, pycharm, etc.) it will color code it so you
can still identify the different variables. If you want the file to look nicer and be readable, you can supply an
additional parameter:

```python
animal_dict_string = json.dumps(animal_dictionary, indent=4)
```

This will result in a file that looks nice and readable (only showing the first portion below):

```json
{
    "leo": {
        "common name": "lion",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": [
            "has a mane",
            "lives in groups",
            "has bad stamina"
        ],
        "subspecies": [
            "leo",
            "melanochaita"
        ]
    },
    "tigris": ...
```

## Reading JSON Files

We can easily read in data in this format as well.

```python
import json

with open("animal_data.json") as file_handle:
    animal_json_string = file_handle.read()
animal_dictionary = json.loads(animal_json_string)
```

We read in the file like we normally would, and store it as a string. Don't do any processing on it (strips or splits)!
Then we just use the `json.loads()` function to convert that string back to a dictionary.

Alternatively, you can use the `json.load()` function on the opened file, which will read the file for you and
convert it to a dictionary:

```python
animal_dictionary = json.load(open("animal_data.json"))
```

Next: [4.4. Lab 4](4.4.%20Lab%204.md)<br>
Previous: [4.2. Sequence Tricks](4.2.%20Sequence%20Tricks.md)

Commit message:

Update 4.3 with better way to open json files and context for the previous recommendation

ebook/CH04/4.3. JSON Files.md, after:

# 4.3. JSON files

Dictionaries are very useful, and used all the time, especially once you start embedding other data structures in them.
They can effectively be a database.

```python
animal_dictionary = {
    "leo": {
        "common name": "lion",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has a mane", "lives in groups", "has bad stamina"],
        "subspecies": ["leo", "melanochaita"],
    },
    "tigris": {
        "common name": "tiger",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has stripes", "lives in Asia", "likes to swim"],
        "subspecies": ["tigris", "sondaica"],
    },
    "pardus": {
        "common name": "leopard",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["has spots", "likes to climb trees", "is solitary"],
        "subspecies": [
            "pardus",
            "fusca",
            "melas",
            "nimr",
            "tulliana",
            "orientalis",
            "delacouri",
            "kotiya",
        ],
    },
    "onca": {
        "common name": "jaguar",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["lives in Americas", "has spots", "nocturnal"],
        "subspecies": [],
    },
    "uncia": {
        "common name": "snow leopard",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": ["is white", "has spots", "likes the cold"],
        "subspecies": [],
    },
}
```

This dictionary has species names as its keys, and its values are themselves dictionaries that all share the same
keys:

- common name (whose value is a string)
- genus (whose value is a string)
- features (whose value is a list)
- subspecies (whose value is a list).

You can imagine that we might often want to write data that we store in dictionaries to a file, but preserve the same
format and organization, and then be able to re-import it back into the same dictionary format. Imagine trying to write
a program that would do this. It would be pretty complicated!

Luckily someone has already done that hard work for us. A special kind of file was developed that is called
a _JSON file_. JSON is short for "JavaScript Object Notation", because the file format was first developed to be able
to solve this exact same problem in the JavaScript langauge. But the JSON file format became popular and used more
generally, and so most popular programming languages have developed a way to read files to that format.

## Creating JSON files

To make this work, what we really want to do is convert a dictionary (and all its parts) into a string, and then write
that string to a file. The json module does that first part for us, and then we can just use normal file writing to
create the file.

```python
import json

animal_json_string = json.dumps(animal_dictionary)

with open("animal_data.json", "w") as animal_file:
    animal_file.write(animal_json_string)
```

The `json.dumps()` function creates a string that includes all the quotes, colons, commas, and brackets (square and
squiggly) that identify the keys and values of the dictionary, and the kinds of data structures that were stored in each
one. So when we write the file, we get this:

```json
{
  "leo": {
    "common name": "lion",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has a mane", "lives in groups", "has bad stamina"],
    "subspecies": ["leo", "melanochaita"]
  },
  "tigris": {
    "common name": "tiger",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has stripes", "lives in Asia", "likes to swim"],
    "subspecies": ["tigris", "sondaica"]
  },
  "pardus": {
    "common name": "leopard",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["has spots", "likes to climb trees", "is solitary"],
    "subspecies": [
      "pardus",
      "fusca",
      "melas",
      "nimr",
      "tulliana",
      "orientalis",
      "delacouri",
      "kotiya"
    ]
  },
  "onca": {
    "common name": "jaguar",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["lives in Americas", "has spots", "nocturnal"],
    "subspecies": []
  },
  "uncia": {
    "common name": "snow leopard",
    "genus": "panthera",
    "features": ["is white", "has spots", "likes the cold"],
    "subspecies": []
  }
}
```

It's just one big string, with no formatting, no line breaks, other than what you get from automatic text-wrapping. If
you open a `.json` file in most code editing software (like sublime text, pycharm, etc.) it will color code it so you
can still identify the different variables. If you want the file to look nicer and be readable, you can supply an
additional parameter:

```python
animal_dict_string = json.dumps(animal_dictionary, indent=4)
```

This will result in a file that looks nice and readable (only showing the first portion below):

```json
{
    "leo": {
        "common name": "lion",
        "genus": "panthera",
        "features": [
            "has a mane",
            "lives in groups",
            "has bad stamina"
        ],
        "subspecies": [
            "leo",
            "melanochaita"
        ]
    },
    "tigris": ...
```

## Reading JSON Files

We can easily read in data in this format as well.

```python
import json

with open("animal_data.json") as file_handle:
    animal_json_string = file_handle.read()
animal_dictionary = json.loads(animal_json_string)
```

We read in the file like we normally would, and store it as a string. Don't do any processing on it (strips or splits)!
Then we just use the `json.loads()` function to convert that string back to a dictionary.

Alternatively, you can use the `json.load()` function on the opened file, which will read the file for you and
convert it to a dictionary:

```python
import json

animal_dictionary = {}
with open("animal_data.json", "r") as fh:
    animal_dictionary = json.load(fh)

# can also use `animal_dictionary = json.load(open("animal_data.json"))`
# but this may result in the file not being closed in a timely manner; this can cause issues
```

Next: [4.4. Lab 4](4.4.%20Lab%204.md)<br>
Previous: [4.2. Sequence Tricks](4.2.%20Sequence%20Tricks.md)
