ebook/CH04/4.4. Lab 4.md, before:

# 4.4. Lab 4

```python
"""
This lab will be the first time that we directly organize the questions into separate functions,
then call them from the main function. This is to practice the general structure of a
well-organized program. When appropriate, this structure will be followed for the
labs from here on out. Follow the instructions within each function to complete the lab.
"""
def q1():
    print("\n######## Question 1 ########\n")
    """
        Use a print statement inside this function to describe:
        - one way a set is different than a dictionary
        - one way a set is different than a list
        - one way a list is different than a dictionary
    """


def q2():
    print("\n######## Question 2 ########\n")
    """
        For the following two sets, create a print statement that uses set methods to tell us:
        - how many items are in each set
        - what items are unique to each set
        - what items are in both sets
        Return the african animals and asian animals at the end of this function
    """
    african_animals = {"lion", "monkey", "elephant", "zebra", "hippo", "hyena"}
    asian_animals = {"tiger", "panda", "reindeer", "elephant", "monkey", "lion"}

def q3(african_animals, asian_animals):
    print("\n######## Question 3 ########\n")
     """
    - Make sure that your `q2()` function returns the african and asian animal sets
    - Pass those two sets into this function as inputs
    - then create your own list of tuples, containing at least 4 animals from either africa or asia:
    e.g., ("my_cool_animal", "africa") or ("my_other_cool_animal", "asia")
    - then write a loop that iterates over that list of tuples you just defined, adding each animal to the correct set
    - print both sets with a label:
        african animals: lion, monkey, elephant, ...
        asian animals: tiger, panda, reindeer, ...
    """

def q4():
    print("\n######## Question 4 ########\n")
    """
    Use a print statement to explain why the set created by the code below has the elements that it has, and the
    order they are in.
    """
    my_set = set("abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz")

def q5():
    print("\n######## Question 5 ########\n")
    """
    Write code that checks to see if 'Champaign' is in the dictionary below, and if not, adds
    its population (89189)
    Then print the dictionary
    """
    north_america_city_populations_dict = {
        "Mexico City": 8918653,
        "New York City": 8550405,
        "Los Angeles": 3971883,
    }

def q6_7():
    print("\n######## Question 6-7 ########\n")
    """
    Go to the URL: http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.mb.txt, and copy the text of Plato's Republic
    and save it to a file called "platos_republic.txt". Then.
    - Q6:
        - create an empty "word_frequency_dict"
        - use Python to open the file, read each line, and split it into a list of tokens (space separated strings).
        - loop through that list of tokens, lower case the token, and remove punctuation from the token
        - check to see if each token is in the word frequency dictionary, if it is not, add it with a frequency of 1,
            if it is, increment its frequency by 1
    - Q7:
        - print the 50 most frequent words in the book, and the frequency of each word, like this (and these are the
            right numbers for the first 10, but you print 50):
            the 7696
            and 5977
            of 5078
            to 3450
            is 2680
            in 2326
            he 2155
            a 2114
            that 1991
            be 1874
    """

def q8_9_10():
    print("\n######## Question 8-9-10 ########\n")
    """
    - Q8: First, copy and paste the data from the animal data json example from the chapter
        into a file called "animal_data.json", then write code that reads the data into a
        dictionary called "animal_data_dict"
    - Q9: loop through "animal_weights" dictionary below
        - check to see if the animal is in the animal_data_dict
        - if it is, create a new key in that animal's dictionary called "weight", which points to the corresponding value
    - Q10: loop through the animal_data_dict, and print out each animal's formal name, common name, and weight on each
        line
        panthera leo, lion, 120 kg
        panthera tigris, tiger, 155 kg
        panthera pardus, leopard, 46 kg
        panthera onca, jaguar, 76 kg
        panthera uncia, snow leopard, 38 kg
    """
    animal_weights = {"leo": 120, "tigris": 155, "pardus": 46, "onca": 76, "uncia": 38}

def main():
    q1()
    q2()
    q3()
    q4()
    q5()
    q6_7()
    q8_9_10()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

Next: [5.0 Core Python Modules](../CH05/5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)<br>
Previous: [4.3. JSON Files](4.3.%20JSON%20Files.md)

Commit message:

Update lab 4 with explicit prohibition of hard coding the animal data as a dictionary

ebook/CH04/4.4. Lab 4.md, after:

# 4.4. Lab 4

```python
"""
This lab will be the first time that we directly organize the questions into separate functions,
then call them from the main function. This is to practice the general structure of a
well-organized program. When appropriate, this structure will be followed for the
labs from here on out. Follow the instructions within each function to complete the lab.
"""
def q1():
    print("\n######## Question 1 ########\n")
    """
        Use a print statement inside this function to describe:
        - one way a set is different than a dictionary
        - one way a set is different than a list
        - one way a list is different than a dictionary
    """


def q2():
    print("\n######## Question 2 ########\n")
    """
        For the following two sets, create a print statement that uses set methods to tell us:
        - how many items are in each set
        - what items are unique to each set
        - what items are in both sets
        Return the african animals and asian animals at the end of this function
    """
    african_animals = {"lion", "monkey", "elephant", "zebra", "hippo", "hyena"}
    asian_animals = {"tiger", "panda", "reindeer", "elephant", "monkey", "lion"}

def q3(african_animals, asian_animals):
    print("\n######## Question 3 ########\n")
     """
    - Make sure that your `q2()` function returns the african and asian animal sets
    - Pass those two sets into this function as inputs
    - then create your own list of tuples, containing at least 4 animals from either africa or asia:
    e.g., ("my_cool_animal", "africa") or ("my_other_cool_animal", "asia")
    - then write a loop that iterates over that list of tuples you just defined, adding each animal to the correct set
    - print both sets with a label:
        african animals: lion, monkey, elephant, ...
        asian animals: tiger, panda, reindeer, ...
    """

def q4():
    print("\n######## Question 4 ########\n")
    """
    Use a print statement to explain why the set created by the code below has the elements that it has, and the
    order they are in.
    """
    my_set = set("abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz")

def q5():
    print("\n######## Question 5 ########\n")
    """
    Write code that checks to see if 'Champaign' is in the dictionary below, and if not, adds
    its population (89189)
    Then print the dictionary
    """
    north_america_city_populations_dict = {
        "Mexico City": 8918653,
        "New York City": 8550405,
        "Los Angeles": 3971883,
    }

def q6_7():
    print("\n######## Question 6-7 ########\n")
    """
    Go to the URL: http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.mb.txt, and copy the text of Plato's Republic
    and save it to a file called "platos_republic.txt". Then.
    - Q6:
        - create an empty "word_frequency_dict"
        - use Python to open the file, read each line, and split it into a list of tokens (space separated strings).
        - loop through that list of tokens, lower case the token, and remove punctuation from the token
        - check to see if each token is in the word frequency dictionary, if it is not, add it with a frequency of 1,
            if it is, increment its frequency by 1
    - Q7:
        - print the 50 most frequent words in the book, and the frequency of each word, like this (and these are the
            right numbers for the first 10, but you print 50):
            the 7696
            and 5977
            of 5078
            to 3450
            is 2680
            in 2326
            he 2155
            a 2114
            that 1991
            be 1874
    """

def q8_9_10():
    print("\n######## Question 8-9-10 ########\n")
    """
    - Q8: First, copy and paste the data from the animal data json example from the chapter
        into a file called "animal_data.json", then write code that reads the data into a
        dictionary called "animal_data_dict". 
        (Note that you can't just hard code the dictionary directly into the code;
        you need to read the data as JSON from the file.)
    - Q9: loop through "animal_weights" dictionary below
        - check to see if the animal is in the animal_data_dict
        - if it is, create a new key in that animal's dictionary called "weight", 
          which points to the corresponding value
    - Q10: loop through the animal_data_dict, and print out each animal's formal name, common name, and weight on each
        line
        panthera leo, lion, 120 kg
        panthera tigris, tiger, 155 kg
        panthera pardus, leopard, 46 kg
        panthera onca, jaguar, 76 kg
        panthera uncia, snow leopard, 38 kg
    """
    animal_weights = {"leo": 120, "tigris": 155, "pardus": 46, "onca": 76, "uncia": 38}

def main():
    q1()
    q2()
    q3()
    q4()
    q5()
    q6_7()
    q8_9_10()


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

Next: [5.0 Core Python Modules](../CH05/5.0.%20Core%20Python%20Modules.md)<br>
Previous: [4.3. JSON Files](4.3.%20JSON%20Files.md)
